
# Wikipedia: Bibliotheca Alexandrina
The Bibliotheca Alexandrina (Latin, 'Library of Alexandria'; Arabic: مكتبة الإسكندرية, romanized: Maktabat al-’Iskandariyya, Egyptian Arabic pronunciation: [mækˈtæb(e)t eskendeˈɾejjæ]) (BA) is a major library and cultural center on the shore of the Mediterranean Sea in Alexandria, Egypt. It is a commemoration of the Library of Alexandria, once one of the largest libraries worldwide, which was lost in antiquity. The Bibliotheca Alexandrina contains books in classical Arabic, English, and French.
The idea of reviving the old library dates back to 1974 when a committee set up by Alexandria University selected a plot of land for its new library. Construction work began in 1995, and after some US$220 million had been spent, the complex was officially inaugurated on 16 October 2002. In 2009, the library received a donation of 500,000 books from the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF). The gift makes the Bibliotheca Alexandrina the sixth-largest Francophone library in the world.
The library offers shelf space for eight million books, and its main reading room spans 20,000 square meters (220,000 sq ft). The complex also houses a conference center; specialized libraries for maps, multimedia, the blind and visually impaired, and for children; four museums; four art galleries for temporary exhibitions; 15 permanent exhibitions; a planetarium; and a manuscript restoration laboratory.

History
The idea of reviving the Library of Alexandria dates back to 1974, when a committee set up by Alexandria University selected a plot of land for its new library between the campus and the seafront, close to where the ancient library once stood. One leading supporter of the project was former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, along with a partnership with UNESCO.
UNESCO organized an architectural design competition in 1988 to choose the design. The competition was won by Snøhetta, a Norwegian architectural office, among 524 other entries. UNESCO also created an International Commission for the Bibliotheca Alexandrina. The first pledges were made for funding the project at a conference held in 1990 in Aswan along the upper Nile River with US$65 million, mostly from the MENA states. Construction work began in 1995, and, after some additional US$220 million had been spent, the complex was officially inaugurated on 16 October 2002.
The Internet Archive donated US$5 million to the BA, including 10 billion web pages from over 16 million sites, 2000 hours of Egyptian and U.S. television broadcasts, 1000 archival films, 100 terabytes of data stored on 200 computers, and a bookscanning facility for local books. The library also received a supplementary donation of 500,000 books from the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris.

Features
The library has shelf space for eight million books, with the main reading room covering 20,000 square metres (220,000 sq ft) on eleven cascading levels. At the time of construction, the reading room was the largest in the world. The complex also houses a conference center; specialized libraries for maps, multimedia, the blind and visually impaired, young people, and for children; four museums; four art galleries for temporary exhibitions; 15 permanent exhibitions; a planetarium; and a manuscript restoration laboratory.
The main reading room stands beneath a 32-meter-high glass-panelled roof, tilted out toward the sea like a sundial, and measuring some 160 m in diameter. The walls are of gray granite, carved with characters from 120 scripts.

Services
The main library can hold up to eight million books. The library provides access to print on demand books via the Espresso Book Machine.
The Taha Hussein Library contains materials for the blind and visually impaired using special software that makes it possible for readers to read books and journals. It is named after Taha Hussein, the Egyptian professor of Arabic and literary critic who was himself blinded at the age of three.
Contains book collections of Nobel Prize Laureates in Literature from 1901. The Nobel Section was inaugurated by Queen Silvia of Sweden and Queen Sonja of Norway on 24 April 2002.

Museums
Antiquities Museum
Established in 2001, the Antiquities Museum is an archeological museum that was situated within a library. It held approximately 1,316 artifacts. The collection includes underwater antiquities from the Mediterranean seabed near the Eastern Harbour and the Bay of Abukir. The museum provides descriptions of artifacts in three languages: English, Arabic, and French.

Manuscript Museum
The Manuscript Museum provides visitors and researchers with rare manuscripts and books. Established in 2001, the Manuscript Museum contains the world's largest collection of digital manuscripts. The Manuscript Museum operates alongside the Manuscript Center.

Sadat Museum
This museum contains many personal belongings of the Egyptian president, Anwar Al Sadat. The collections include some of his military robes, his Nobel Prize medal, his copy of the Qur'an, a few of his handwritten letters, pictures of him and his family, and the blood-stained military robe he wore on the day of his assassination. The museum also contains a recording in his voice of part of the Qur'an and assorted newspaper articles written about him.

Permanent exhibitions
The Our Digital World exhibition displays some of the library's digital projects, including digital archives of former presidents, the Science Supercourse, and the Encyclopedia of Life. Additionally, digital versions of books, such as Description de l'Égypte and L'Art Arabe, are available.
The World of Shadi Abdel Salam exhibition contains works of Egyptian film director and screenwriter Shadi Abdel Salam. The work was donated by his family. The Impressions of Alexandria exhibition is divided into two sections: Alexandria as seen by Artists and Travelers and Cosmopolitan Alexandria: a Photographic Memory.

The Culturama is a hall that consists of a 180-degree panoramic interactive computer screen with a diameter of 10 meters that is made up of nine separate flat screens arranged in a semicircle and nine video projectors controlled by a single computer. It was developed by the Egyptian Center for Documentation of Cultural and CULTNAT and holds its patent in 2007.

Digital Assets Repository
The Digital Assets Repository (DAR) is a system developed at the Bibliotheca Alexandrina by the International School of Information Science (ISIS) that maintains a digital library collections as well as providing free public access to the library's digitized collections through web-based search and browsing facilities via DAR's website.

Management
Per Presidential Decree No. 76 in 2001, the Bibliotheca Alexandria is managed by a Council of Patrons, a Board of Trustees, and a Director. The founding director was Ismail Serageldin, who served until May 2017. He was succeeded by manager Moustafa El Feqy.
The Board of Trustees shall number no less than fifteen and no more than thirty, of whom five shall be ex-officio members of the Egyptian Government, namely the Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research, the Minister of Culture, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Governor of Alexandria and the President of the University of Alexandria.

Post-revolutionary involvement
While the library was shut down during the 2011 Egyptian revolution, young adults were seen in a circle around the building to protect against looters and vandals. Students from neighboring universities make up 80% of Bibliotheca Alexandrina patrons. The Bibliotheca Alexandrina held a variety of symposiums in 2011, emphasizing the 2011 Egyptian revolution. Other topics included in these symposiums were social work. All of these events were freely available to the public.

Criticism
Many allege that the library is a white elephant, which serves little more than a vanity project for the Egyptian government. Furthermore, there are fears that censorship would affect the library's collection.
The building's architecture (which imitates a rising sun) upset some who believed too much money was being spent on construction rather than the library's actual collection. Due to the lack of available funds, the library had only 500,000 books in 2002; however, in 2010, the library received an additional 500,000 books from the Bibliothèque nationale de France. The library relies on donations to buy books for its collections.
On its opening day, an exhibition in the library's Manuscript Center drew international criticism for including the anti-Semitic fabricated text, The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, alongside the Bible and the Torah in a display of monotheist religion holy books. The director of the Manuscript Center, Youssef Ziedan, initially justified its inclusion in an Egyptian newspaper article. In response to the criticism, the director of the library ordered that The Protocols be removed from the exhibition, prompting a statement from Ziedan on his personal website that the quotes attributed to him in the article were "fabricated groundless lies" and acknowledged that The Protocols was a fabricated and racist work.

See also
Bibliotheca Alexandrina's 100 Greatest Egyptian Films
Planetarium Science Center

References
Further reading
Watson, Bruce (April 2002). "Rising Sun". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2009.
Ali, Amro (16 October 2012) "Power, Rebirth and Scandal: A Decade of the Bibliotheca Alexandrina". Jadaliyya.

External links

Official website 
https://www.facebook.com/bibalexOfficial
https://twitter.com/bibalexOfficial
https://www.instagram.com/bibalexofficial/
https://www.youtube.com/user/BAchannel
Bibliotheca Alexandrina Webcast
Bibliotheca Alexandrina webarchive
Wikimania 2008 venue description
About Bibliotheca Alexandrina
# Britannica:
The Bibliotheca Alexandrina is a research institution in Alexandria, Egypt,
that was inspired by the Library of Alexandria from classical times. The idea
of reviving the ancient library was first proposed in 1972 by Mostafa El-
Abbadi, a professor at Alexandria University. The Egyptian government decided
to sponsor the project, and it received international publicity and support
through UNESCO. Construction of the $200 million structure was completed in
2001, and the complex officially opened on October 16, 2002.

### Design and Features

The library is a massive cylinder emerging from the ground at a shallow angle,
only about 130 feet (40 meters) from the Mediterranean Sea. The disk-shaped
roof resembles the sun rising over the Mediterranean, and the roof pattern of
aluminum and glass panels resembles a microchip. One outer wall of the
structure comprises some 6,400 granite panels bearing characters from all
known alphabets. The library was designed to house eight million volumes on
seven cascading levels. The collection is shelved so that the oldest materials
occupy the lowest level, forming a metaphoric foundation for later works. In
addition, the library houses a planetarium, a school of library and
information science, facilities for the digital preservation of rare books and
manuscripts, and a conference center.

### Cultural Significance

The Bibliotheca Alexandrina is an important addition to the city’s cultural
offerings. It is located adjacent to Alexandria University and near the site
of the ancient structure. The institution contains a working library, a
repository for manuscripts, a planetarium, museums, art galleries, and
conference facilities.



## Britannica: Bibliotheca Alexandrina | History & Facts | Britannica
Bibliotheca Alexandrina,  research institution in Alexandria, Egypt, that took its inspiration from the Library of Alexandria of Classical times.
The idea of reviving the ancient library was first proposed in 1972 by Mostafa El-Abbadi, a professor at Alexandria University. The Egyptian government decided to sponsor the project, and it received international publicity and support through UNESCO. A site was selected adjacent to Alexandria University and near the location of the ancient library.
Construction of the $200 million structure was completed in 2001, and the library’s design drew worldwide praise. Essentially, the library is a massive cylinder emerging from the ground at a shallow angle only about 130 feet (40 metres) from the Mediterranean Sea. The disk-shaped roof suggests the sun rising over the Mediterranean, and the roof pattern of aluminum and glass panels resembles a microchip. One outer wall of the structure is made up of some 6,400 granite panels bearing characters from all the known alphabets.
The complex was officially opened on October 16, 2002. The library was designed to house eight million volumes on seven cascading levels. The collection is shelved so that the oldest materials occupy the lowest level, forming a metaphoric foundation for later works. In addition, the library houses a planetarium, a school of library and information science, facilities for the digital preservation of rare books and manuscripts, and a conference centre.

## Britannica: Alexandria - Ancient City, Mediterranean Port, Cosmopolitan Hub | Britannica
Alexander the Great founded the city in 332 bce after the start of his Persian campaign; it was to be the capital of his new Egyptian dominion and a naval base that would control the Mediterranean. The choice of the site that included the ancient settlement of Rhakotis (which dates to 1500 bce) was determined by the abundance of water from Lake Maryūṭ, then fed by a spur of the Canopic Nile, and by the good anchorage provided offshore by the island of Pharos.
After Alexander left Egypt his viceroy, Cleomenes, continued the creation of Alexandria. With the breakup of the empire upon Alexander’s death in 323 bce, control of the city passed to his viceroy, Ptolemy I Soter, who founded the dynasty that took his name. The early Ptolemies successfully blended the religions of ancient Greece and Egypt in the cult of Serapis (Sarapis) and presided over Alexandria’s golden age. Alexandria profited from the demise of Phoenician power after Alexander sacked Tyre (332 bce) and from Rome’s growing trade with the East via the Nile and the canal that then linked it with the Red Sea. Indeed, Alexandria became, within a century of its founding, one of the Mediterranean’s largest cities and a centre of Greek scholarship and science. Such scholars as Euclid, Archimedes, Plotinus the philosopher, and Ptolemy and Eratosthenes the geographers studied at the Mouseion, the great research institute founded in the beginning of the 3rd century bce by the Ptolemies that included the city’s famed library. The ancient library housed numerous texts, the majority of them in Greek; a “daughter library” was established at the temple of Serapis about 235 bce. The library itself was later destroyed in the civil war that occurred under the Roman emperor Aurelian in the late 3rd century ce, while the subsidiary branch was destroyed in 391 ce (see Alexandria, Library of).
Alexandria was also home to a populous Jewish colony and was a major centre of Jewish learning; the translation of the Old Testament from Hebrew to Greek, the Septuagint, was produced there. Many other ethnic and religious groups were represented in the city, and Alexandria was the scene of much interethnic strife during this period.
The decline of the Ptolemies in the 2nd and 1st centuries bce was matched by the rise of Rome. Alexandria played a major part in the intrigues that led to the establishment of imperial Rome.
It was at Alexandria that Cleopatra, the last of the Ptolemies, courted Julius Caesar and claimed to have borne him a son. Her attempts at restoring the fortunes of the Ptolemaic dynasty, however, were thwarted by Caesar’s assassination and her unsuccessful support of Mark Antony against Caesar’s great-nephew Octavian. In 30 bce Octavian (later the emperor Augustus) formally brought Alexandria and Egypt under Roman rule. The city held the key to the Egyptian granary on which Rome increasingly came to rely.
St. Mark, author of the second gospel in the New Testament, is said to have preached in Alexandria in the mid-1st century ce. Several outstanding Bible scholars and theologians of the early Christian era were educated in Alexandria, including Origen (c. 185–c. 254), who contributed to an evolving synthesis of Christianity and Greco-Roman philosophy and who headed the city’s famous catechetical school. Alexandria’s Christian community continued to grow in numbers and influence and resisted Rome’s attempts to impose emperor worship. State-directed persecutions and spontaneous attacks by pagans upon Christians occurred intermittently; Diocletian initiated a particularly vicious campaign in 303 in which many Egyptian Christians were martyred, a number of them in Alexandria. Nevertheless, persecution failed to stem the growing spiritual movement, and the empire finally legalized Christianity under Constantine I, though the new alliance with the state set the stage for schisms within the church.
Among the first doctrinal questions to rend the church was a dispute between two Alexandrian prelates, Athanasius and Arius, over the nature of Jesus Christ’s relationship to God the Father. The issue was addressed in 325 at the Council of Nicaea, which affirmed Christ’s full deity and branded Arianism—the belief that Christ, though preexistent, was inferior to God—as heresy. Arianism, however, had many imperial champions, and this sharpened the conflict between the Alexandrian church and the state. The doctrinal issue was not finally settled until the Council of Constantinople in 381. By the close of the 4th century, elements of the Christian establishment in Alexandria had also mobilized against the remnants of paganism, destroying the temple of Serapis; other violent clashes broke out between rival gangs and factions based in the city around this time.
During the course of the 4th century, the patriarchs of Alexandria consolidated their position over Egypt’s clergy. The pope of Alexandria, as the post of patriarch was also known, exercised great influence in the church and vied with the patriarch of Constantinople for ecclesiastical preeminence in the eastern Roman Empire. A decisive break occurred at the Council of Chalcedon in 451; the council deposed Dioscorus, the Alexandrian pope, and adopted a Christological statement that was regarded by Egyptian Christians as compromising belief in the divine Son. For dogmatic and political reasons, the Egyptian Monophysite church rejected the Chalcedonian formula and resisted Constantinople’s attempts to bring it into line. A dissident church developed to oppose state-supported orthodoxy and became a focus of indigenous Egyptian loyalties. Disaffection with Byzantine rule created the conditions in which Alexandria fell first to the Persians, in 616, and then to the Arabs, in 642.
Though Alexandria surrendered to Muslim Arab expansion without resistance, the conquest was followed by a substantial exodus of the leading elements of the Greek population. Thenceforth, apart from an interlude in 645 when the city was briefly retaken by the Byzantine fleet, Alexandria’s fortunes were tied to political and cultural developments in Islam. Alexandria was eclipsed politically by the new Arab capital at Al-Fusṭāṭ (which later was absorbed into the modern capital, Cairo); the Coptic patriarchate was transferred there from Alexandria in the 11th century. Nevertheless, Alexandria continued to flourish as a trading centre, principally for textiles and luxury goods, as Arab influence expanded westward through North Africa and then into Europe. The city also was important as a naval base, especially under the Fāṭimids and the Mamlūks, but already it was contracting in size in line with its new, more modest status. The Arab walls (rebuilt in the 13th and 14th centuries and torn down in the 19th century) encompassed less than half the area of the Greco-Roman city.
Following its recovery from the devastation of the bubonic plague in the mid-14th century, Alexandria was able to profit from the growth of the East-West spice trade, which flowed through Egypt. The eventual loss of this trade following the Portuguese discovery of a sea route to India in 1498 was a severe blow to the city’s fortunes and to the Mamlūk state. With the Ottoman defeat of the Mamlūks in 1517, Egypt’s status shifted to that of a province within a wider empire, charge of which fell to the Ottomans. Under Ottoman rule, the canal linking Alexandria to the Rosetta branch of the Nile was allowed to silt up, strangling the city’s commercial lifeline. By the time Napoleon invaded Egypt in 1798, Alexandria had been reduced to a small Ottoman port.

## Britannica: Library of Alexandria | Description, Facts, & Destruction | Britannica
Library of Alexandria,  the most famous library of Classical antiquity. It formed part of the research institute at Alexandria in Egypt that is known as the Alexandrian Museum (Mouseion, “shrine of the Muses”).
Libraries and archives were known to many ancient civilizations in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Syria, Asia Minor, and Greece, but the earliest such institutions were of a local and regional nature, primarily concerned with the conservation of their own particular traditions and heritage. The idea of a universal library, like that of Alexandria, arose only after the Greek mind had begun to envisage and encompass a larger worldview. The Greeks were impressed by the achievements of their neighbours, and many Greek intellectuals sought to explore the resources of their knowledge. There is literary evidence of Greek individuals visiting Egypt especially to acquire knowledge: e.g., Herodotus, Plato (particularly in Phaedrus and Timaeus), Theophrastus, and Eudoxus of Cnidus (as detailed by Diogenes Laërtius in the 3rd century ce).
Against that background of avid hunger for knowledge among the Greeks, Alexander launched his global enterprise in 334 bce, which he accomplished with meteoric speed until his untimely death in 323 bce. His aim throughout had not been restricted to conquering lands as far from Macedonia as India but had been to also explore them. He required his companions, generals, and scholars to report to him in detail on regions previously unmapped and uncharted. His campaigns resulted in a “considerable addition of empirical knowledge of geography,” as Eratosthenes remarked (as reported by Greek geographer Strabo). The reports that Alexander had acquired survived after his death, and they motivated an unprecedented movement of scientific research and study of the Earth, its natural physical qualities, and its inhabitants. The time was pregnant with a new spirit that engendered a renaissance of human culture. It was in that atmosphere that the great library and Mouseion saw the light of day in Alexandria.
The founding of the library and the Mouseion is unquestionably connected with the name of Demetrius of Phaleron, a member of the Peripatetic school and a former Athenian politician. After his fall from power in Athens, Demetrius sought refuge at the court of King Ptolemy I Soter (c. 297 bce) and became the king’s adviser. Ptolemy soon took advantage of Demetrius’s wide and versatile knowledge and, about 295 bce, charged him with the task of founding the library and the Mouseion.
The “Letter of Aristeas” of the 2nd century bce reveals that the institution was conceived as a universal library:
The same claim was reiterated more than once: Irenaeus spoke of Ptolemy’s desire to equip “his library with the writings of all men as far as they were worth serious attention.” Undoubtedly, however, the largest amount of material was written in Greek. In fact, judging from the scholarly work produced in Alexandria, it seems likely that the whole corpus of Greek literature was amassed in the library.
One of the major acquisitions for the library was the “books of Aristotle,” concerning which there are two conflicting accounts. According to Athenaeus, Philadelphus purchased that collection for a large sum of money, whereas Strabo reported that Aristotle’s books passed on in succession through different hands, until they were later confiscated in 86 bce by Sulla, who carried them away to Rome. The two accounts perhaps deal with two different things. Athenaeus may be referring to the collection of books that Aristotle had amassed at his school in Athens, which Philadelphus was able to purchase when his former tutor, Straton, was head of the Lyceum. Strabo’s account may be dealing with the personal writings that Aristotle had bequeathed to his successors as heads of the Lyceum, until they were confiscated by Sulla. In support of the latter understanding is Plutarch’s remark that “the Peripatetics no longer possess the original texts of Aristotle and Theophrastus, because they had fallen into idle and base hands.”
Fabulous stories circulated about the lengths to which the Ptolemies would go in their avid hunt for books. One method to which they reportedly resorted was to search every ship that sailed into the harbour of Alexandria. If a book was found, it was taken to the library for a decision as to whether to return it or to confiscate it and replace it with a copy made on the spot (with an adequate compensation to the owner). Books acquired in that manner were designated “from the ships.”
Another story (reported by Galen in the writings on Hippocrates) reveals how Ptolemy III managed to obtain the original texts of the great dramatic poets Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. The precious texts were safeguarded in the Athenian state archives and were not allowed to be lent out. The king, however, persuaded the governors of Athens to permit him to borrow them in order to have them copied. The enormous sum of 15 talents of silver was deposited in Athens as a pledge for their safe restitution. The king thereupon kept the originals and sent back copies, willingly forfeiting the pledge.
Those irregular methods of collection were supplemented by the purchase of books from different places, especially from Athens and Rhodes, which sustained the largest book markets of the time. Occasionally, the library’s collectors bought different versions of the same work—for example, in the Homeric texts that came “from Chios,” “from Sinope,” and “from Massilia.”
Of languages other than Greek, Egyptian had the largest section. Ptolemy I is said to have encouraged Egyptian priests to accumulate records of their past tradition and heritage and to render them available for use by Greek scholars and men of letters whom he had invited to live in Egypt. Best-known examples from each group were the Egyptian priest Manetho, who had good command of Greek, and the Greek author Hecataeus of Abdera.

## Britannica: Classical scholarship | Definition, History, Scholars, & Facts | Britannica
classical scholarship,  the study, in all its aspects, of ancient Greece and Rome. In continental Europe the field is known as “classical philology,” but the use, in some circles, of “philology” to denote the study of language and literature—the result of abbreviating the 19th-century “comparative philology”—has lent an unfortunate ambiguity to the term. During the 19th century, Germans evolved the concept of Altertumswissenschaft (“science of antiquity”) to emphasize the unity of the various disciplines of which the study of the ancient world consists. Broadly speaking, the province of classical scholarship is in time the period between the 2nd millennium bc and ad 500 and in space the area covered by the conquests and spheres of influence of Greece and Rome at their widest extent.
This article surveys the history of classical scholarship thus defined from antiquity until the late 20th century.
Until the Renaissance, Greek scholarship in the East and Latin scholarship in the West tended to follow different courses, and it is therefore convenient to treat them separately during this period.
Greek epic poetry was recited in early times by professional performers known as rhapsodists, or rhapsodes, who sometimes offered interpretations of the works as well. In the 6th century bc Theagenes of Rhegium is said to have “searched out Homer’s poetry and life and date,” to have offered an allegorical interpretation of the battle of the gods in the 20th book of the Iliad, and to have been cited for a variant in Homer’s text. The Sophists of the 5th century bc—paid writers, lecturers, and teachers such as Protagoras, Prodicus, Gorgias, and Hippias—gave ethical instruction in the form of the exposition of poetry, particularly that of Homer, which from this time formed the staple of Greek education. Some of them were interested in etymology, phonetics, the exact meanings of words, correct diction, and the classification of the parts of speech. Hippias laid the foundations of ancient chronography by making a list of victors in the Olympic Games, and Alcidamas (c. 400 bc) wrote a book on Homer. However, the efforts of the Sophists in this direction, considerable as they were, had a more or less casual and arbitrary character.
Plato (c. 428/427–348/347 bc) strongly resisted the claim that the poets were reliable interpreters of religion and morality. In his dialogue Cratylus he rejected the theory that the study of words can reveal the meaning of things, insisting that things themselves must be studied. Plato’s pupil Aristotle (384–322 bc) defended poetry against his master; he valued highly the Iliad and the Odyssey, which from his time were regarded (together with the mock-epic Margites) as the genuine works of an individual Homer. He took a similar view of tragedy, which he believed effected a purification (katharsis) of the emotions upon which it played. Aristotle wrote about linguistic, dramatic, and other problems in Homer, refuting such detractors of the poet as Zoilus, compiled lists of Olympic and Pythian victors, collected details about the Athenian tragic and comic festivals, and supplemented his Politics with a collection of 158 studies of the constitutions of various Greek states. He also carried further the discussion of the constituent parts of a sentence and discussed the nature of synonyms, compounds, and rare words in early poetry.
The school of Aristotle, known as the Lyceum, or Peripatos, continued to make this kind of learned work an adjunct to its philosophical activities. Aristotle’s successor, Theophrastus (c. 372–c. 287 bc), collected the opinions of earlier philosophers. Dicaearchus (flourished c. 320 bc) wrote about the life of Greece, and Aristoxenus (flourished late 4th century bc) about the history and the theory of music. Heracleides Ponticus (c. 390–c. 322 bc) wrote one book on Archilochus and Homer and another on the dates of Homer and Hesiod. Clearchus collected proverbs, and Demetrius of Phaleron fables. All these philosophers were guided by Aristotle’s teleological concept of intellectual activity, according to which philosophy is the culminating element of civilization. A 4th-century commentary on an Orphic poem, discovered in 1963 on a papyrus from a grave in Derveni, Macedonia, deserves mention as the earliest known commentary on a text; it is not a linguistic commentary but offers an allegorical interpretation that is doubtless very different from what the poet had intended.
During the Hellenistic Age (usually reckoned to extend from the death of Alexander the Great in 323 bc to the 1st century ad) scholarship flourished nowhere more than in the great city of Alexandria, the capital of the Ptolemies, the kings of Egypt. Early in the 3rd century bc Ptolemy I founded the famous Mouseion (Museum) of Alexandria, a community of learned men organized along the lines of a religious cult and headed by a priest of the Muses; part of the Museum was a splendid library that became the most celebrated of the ancient world. In its establishment the king is said to have had the assistance of the eminent Peripatetic scholar and statesman Demetrius of Phaleron, who left Athens about 300 bc; unfortunately, the evidence about the part he played is scanty and unreliable. The Museum community included both poets and scholars, as well as several individuals who combined these pursuits. From the time of the poet-scholar Philetas, or Philitas (c. 330–c. 270 bc), the tutor of Ptolemy II, the scholars there were much concerned with the collection and interpretation (glossae) of rare poetic words. Philetas’ pupil Zenodotus of Ephesus (c. 325–260 bc) was the first librarian at Alexandria; using the manuscripts collected for the Library but also trusting to his own judgment, sometimes in a manner that seemed to later critics dangerously subjective, he made the first critical edition of Homer, marking passages of doubtful authenticity with critical signs in the margins. Zenodotus also edited Pindar and Anacreon and perhaps other lyric poets; at about the same time the epic and elegiac poet Alexander Aetolus is said to have corrected the text of the tragic poets, and the dramatic poet Lycophron the comic poets, but singularly little is known about these editions.
Somewhat later the great poet Callimachus (c. 305–c. 240 bc) compiled the Pinakes (“Tablets”), a vast catalogue raisonné of the chief authors, with biographical and bibliographical information. Callimachus is said to have written a book opposing the chief Peripatetic critic of the time, Praxiphanes, and is widely held to have criticized Peripatetic literary theory; but the scantiness of the evidence for this enjoins great caution.
Rather later the great geographer and mathematician Eratosthenes (c. 276–c. 194 bc), the third librarian, laid the foundations of a systematic chronography; more of his work would be known had it not been largely superseded in popular use by the 2nd-century chronicles of Apollodorus of Athens, which were a learned compilation but left out the important scientific and mathematical part.
Zenodotus’ editions of Homer and Hesiod were improved upon by the fourth librarian, Aristophanes of Byzantium (c. 257–180 bc), who also edited the lyric poets, setting out their verses according to a systematic metrical theory; edited Aristophanes, Menander, and perhaps other comic poets; edited Sophocles and at least part of Euripides; and compiled useful summaries of the plots of plays with details of their productions. His Lexeis (“Readings”) was the most important of the numerous lexicographical works produced at this time, which included lexicons of particular authors and dialects; he also wrote some of the many treatises about literature that were now appearing.
Aristarchus of Samothrace (c. 217–145 bc), the sixth librarian, wrote not only monographs about poetry but also important commentaries on Homer, Pindar, and much of tragedy and comedy. Aristarchus was one of the many learned men who left Alexandria in consequence of the disastrous persecution of learning by Ptolemy VIII, from which that city’s standing as a great centre of learning never quite recovered. (It seems that the great library survived a fire set in Alexandria in 47 bc by Julius Caesar, whose army supported Cleopatra in a civil war; it was finally destroyed in ad 272 in the civil war under the Roman emperor Aurelian.)

## Britannica: Library of Alexandria - Ancient, Burning, Destruction | Britannica
The fate of that great wealth of books remains provocative and controversial. For centuries the main point of contention was whether or not the library (or libraries—as two sites existed) survived until the Arab conquest of Alexandria in the 7th century. In the 21st century, however, the topic has cooled down, and there is growing agreement among serious scholars that both libraries had both perished long before the Arab conquest. Scholars further believe that there is enough evidence to show that the destruction of the two libraries occurred at different times.
The Royal Library was an unfortunate casualty of war. In 48 bce Julius Caesar became involved in a civil war in Egypt between Cleopatra and her brother Ptolemy XIII. Caesar sided with Cleopatra and was soon besieged by the Ptolemaic forces by land and sea in the great harbour. He realized that his only chance lay in setting fire to the enemy fleet, and it was by that drastic measure that he managed to gain the upper hand. Yet he is remarkably silent regarding the extent of the destruction caused by the fire in the city itself. Subsequent authors, however, provide details of the ensuing destruction. Most explicit is Plutarch, who, after a personal visit to Alexandria, explained that “Caesar was forced to repel the danger by using fire, which spread from the dockyards and destroyed the Great Library.” Equally indicative is a statement by Strabo who, during a long stay in the city (c. 25–20 bce), expressed in an indirect manner his regrets over the loss of that great library that had once supplied Eratosthenes and Hipparchus with the original reports of earlier discoveries, sources that were no longer there for him to consult.
The daughter library, protected by the Serapeum, subsisted up to the 4th century as long as paganism survived. But when Christianity became the one and only religion acknowledged throughout the empire, Emperor Theodosius I in his zeal to wipe out all vestiges of paganism issued a decree in 391 sanctioning the demolition of temples in Alexandria. Empowered by the imperial decree, Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, led an attack on the Serapeum, and he himself gave the first blow to the cult statue of Serapis. His frenzied followers ran amok in the temple, destroying and plundering. When the destruction was complete, Theophilus ordered a church to be built on the site.
Several testimonies written by contemporary or near-contemporary eyewitnesses testify to the fact that the devastation was extensive. One Theodoret claims that “the temple was destroyed to its foundations.” Another witness, Eunapius, mentions in Vita Aedesii that Theophilus and his followers
A third contemporary witness was Aphthonius, who appears to have visited the Serapeum before 391 and wrote his description of it sometime after the destruction under the title “A description of the Acropolis of Alexandria.” One statement reads as follows:
There is no doubt that Aphthonius was describing conditions as they existed before the destruction, since it is unthinkable to speak of worshiping the old gods after 391 when a church was set up on the site.
It is clear from the above evidence that the attack on the Serapeum in 391 put an end to the temple and the daughter library housed in it. Tension in the city continued during the first two decades of the 5th century and then cooled off. Alexandria resumed its normal life under new conditions. With Christianity prevailing, the catechetical school alone dominated the intellectual scene, and no more is heard of the Mouseion and its libraries.
In 642 the Arab general ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ conquered Egypt and occupied Alexandria. The events of the early Arab conquests were recorded by historians from several sides, including Arabs, Copts, and Byzantines. For more than five centuries after the conquest, there was no mention of and not a single reference to any accident related to an Alexandrian library under the Arabs. Suddenly, early in the 13th century appears an account reported by Ibn al-Qifṭī and other Arab authors describing how ʿAmr had burned the books of the ancient Library of Alexandria. The story has a fictitious flavour and has repeatedly been criticized, notably by 18th-century British historian Edward Gibbon, and it has since been proved to be a 12th-century fabrication.
Two questions arise from that circumstance: What happened in the 12th century that suddenly aroused interest in the fate of the Library of Alexandria and further led to an accusation that ʿAmr was the culprit? Why, after a total silence of more than eight centuries after the destruction of the Serapeum, should Ibn al-Qifṭī be so anxious to record such a story in full detail?
The 11th and 12th centuries were decisive in the history of the Crusades and a crucial period in world history. During those centuries two developments—not conspicuously interrelated—were taking place in Europe and the Arab world. The first was military, and it was decided in favour of the Arabs on the battlefield in Palestine. The second was cultural and of more far-reaching consequences, and it was decided in favour of the West. In both Byzantium and Europe there was a remarkable revival of classical learning, especially Greek philosophy. In the mid-11th century a university was established in Constantinople with faculties in law, philosophy, and philology. In western Europe the flourishing Scholastic movement led to a widespread founding of universities in France, Italy, England, and Germany, including those at Chartres, Paris, Bologna, and Oxford.
The ensuing gradual desacralization of learning was most graphically illustrated in the transformation of the book in the 12th century. Previously, the production of books had been largely confined to the monasteries. The monastic book of the early Middle Ages was luxurious, made of fine parchment and gold leaf, and contained painstaking script and artistic illuminations. Such beautiful masterpieces were obviously much too costly and rare for the thousands of masters and students who thronged the 12th-century seats of learning. To supply their needs, publishers (stationarii) began to mass-produce books, employing scores of copyists working at a feverish rate. Also, a fresh supply of books for publication was permanently sought after everywhere. By that time it had become known that the great cities in the Muslim world, with their renowned libraries, were depositories of a great wealth of books, especially the ancient books of the Greeks. Translation from Arabic into Latin became an essential feature of the revival of learning, and many works of the Greek classics were made known to Europe at second hand through Arabic translation.
By contrast, the fate of books and libraries in the Muslim East was decidedly different. Certain incidents that coincided with the Crusades in the 11th and 12th centuries resulted in the destruction of libraries. The most-notable reported event detrimental to a public library was during the great famine that occurred in Egypt about 1070 (about ah 460) when the Fāṭimid caliph al-Mustanṣir was forced to offer for sale thousands of books of the great Fāṭimid library in Cairo in order to pay the money due to his Turkish soldiers. On one occasion he sold “18,000 books on the ancient sciences.” On another, in one day, he carried out of the library 25 camel-loads of books to pay off debts to two of his ministers. The portion of one of the ministers, Ābu al-Faraj, was estimated at 5000 dinars, although its real worth was 100,000 dinars. Among those treasures was tapestry of woven silk with an image of a world map that showed regions of the earth with their cities, mountains, seas, rivers, and castles of various sizes. It was highlighted by pictures of Mecca and Medina. At the bottom corner was inscribed “Made by order of Caliph al-Muʿizz in ah 353 (959 ce) worth 1022 dinars.” In that way, vast numbers of priceless books were scattered throughout the region.
Another tragic war-related incident happened during the capture of Tripoli (now in Lebanon) by the Crusaders in 1102. After a siege of six years, the city offered to capitulate on the condition that lives and property be safeguarded, which the Crusaders promised. But after the surrender the Crusaders, in the words of Ibn al-Athīr, plundered the city and captured money, treasures from its people, and books from its schools beyond count.
During those troubled times there were incidents of aggression even on the personal level on private book collections. A case in point concerns Usāmah ibn Munqidh, a distinguished Muslim general and poet. He had obtained from the king of Jerusalem a safe conduct for his family to sail from Egypt to Syria. Off the coast of Acre (now ʿAkko, Israel), the king’s Crusader soldiers stopped the ship and confiscated his entire wealth, which included his private library. With moving brevity, Usāmah reported the whole incident in his autobiography. He was particularly distressed not so much at the loss of his money as at the loss of his library of 4,000 magnificent books, which “left a wound in my heart which cannot be healed as long as I live.”
Those incidents aroused feelings of public indignation and anger and often resulted in accusations and counteraccusations. In such circumstances the fabrication of a story blaming Arabs for the destruction of the most famous library of the ancient world at Alexandria would be suitable material for the battle of words that characterized the time of the Crusades.
As to the second question, why Ibn al-Qifṭī so relished the reporting of an unfounded story in such full details, his motivation may have had something to do with his family’s close association with Saladin and his family. Ibn al-Qifṭī’s father had served Saladin as a judge in Jerusalem, and Ibn al-Qifṭī himself was a judge in Aleppo in 1214. In other words, they belonged to the new Sunni regime of Saladin that had overthrown the old Shīʿite rule of the Fāṭimids. After establishing his rule in Egypt, Saladin found himself in dire need of money to carry on his campaigns against the Crusaders and to pay off those who had cooperated with him and served him. He therefore donated as well as offered for sale many of the treasures he had confiscated. On two occasions it is reported that among those treasures were great public libraries.
The first incident is reported by two eminent authorities, al-Maqrīzī and Abū Shāmah. According to al-Maqrīzī, once Saladin had gained control over Egypt (1171 ce, or 567 ah), he announced the distribution and sale by auction of the famous Fāṭimid library: “the auctioneer, Ibn Sura, took charge of the sale which lasted several years.” With obvious sorrow, al-Maqrīzī further quotes from Ibn Abī Ṭayy that after the capture of the palace by Saladin, of its many treasures, he sold the library that was one of the wonders of the world, and it is said that in the whole Muslim world there was no library to equal that in the Fāṭimid palace. That incident is further substantiated by the details reported by Abū Shāmah, who quotes al-ʿImād, one of Saladin’s assistants, who mentioned that the library at that time contained “120,000 leather-bound volumes of those immortal ancient books…of these, eight camel-loads were transported to Syria.” Thus Saladin liquidated what remained of a library that had once contained, according to Abū Shāmah, as many as two million volumes before the Fāṭimids themselves starting selling it.
Abū Shāmah reported a second incident, in his account of the fate of another library, of more than a million books, in the Syrian city of Amida (present day Diyarbakır) on the upper Tigris River, which Saladin in 1183 ce (ah 579) donated, for services rendered, to his chief supporters. Abū Shāmah reported that Al-Qāḍī al-Fāḍil selected 70 camel-loads from it and that Kara Arsalan spent seven years in “selling the surplus treasures of Amida.”
Two significant points emerge from the above account. First, there was a considerable increase in the demand for books by the West at the time of the Crusades, especially in the 12th century, when Europe was experiencing a revival of learning sometimes called the proto-Renaissance. The two incidents of the public library of Tripoli and the private one of Usāmah ibn Munqidh indicate that the acquisition of books was one of the objectives of the Crusaders. It is also likely that most of the books that were offered for sale found their way outside the Muslim world. Repeated statements, derived from almost contemporary sources, assert that the books first sold by al-Mustanṣir “were taken by ships in the Nile to Alexandria or to North Africa” or “carried to the rest of the world.” To be more specific, the books that were sold by Saladin in Cairo, or at least part of them, “were carried to Syria.” As for the books of Amida, “the earth was filled with its treasures.”
A prevailing sadness also emerges from those accounts, which is an indication of the widespread feeling of resentment and discontent at the loss of such a priceless legacy of learning. Saladin was accordingly exposed to bitter criticism, especially by the survivors of the old regime whom he feared and sought to suppress. It was imperative, therefore, that the adherents of the new order should rise to the occasion and seek to justify the actions of the new ruler. There is little doubt that it was in response to the exigency of those pressing circumstances that Ibn al-Qifṭī included in his History of Wise Men the fantastic story of ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ ordering the books of the ancient Library of Alexandria to be used as fuel for heating the city bath. In light of the above analysis, most contemporary scholars agree that the ancient Library of Alexandria had ceased to exist long before the Arab conquest of Egypt, and, in the words of British-American historian Bernard Lewis, “It is surely time that the Caliph ʿUmar and ʿAmr ibn al-Āṣ were finally acquitted of this charge.”

## Britannica: Alexandria - Port, Rail, Road | Britannica
Alexandria is linked to other Egyptian cities by railway, road, and air service. It also is connected by canal with the Nile. Transport within the city is provided by tram service, as well as a system of taxis and buses. The main rail link to Cairo has been upgraded several times, and Alexandria is also the terminus for the rail line that runs to Al-Sallūm on the Libyan border. The Alexandria-Cairo desert highway is one of Egypt’s best roads; it has relieved pressure on the agricultural route through the delta region as well as encouraging desert development. Air transport services generally operate to Cairo, though a number of international carriers have begun service out of Alexandria as well. Severe limitations constricted the capacity for expansion of the old airport at Nuzhah, which was built on land reclaimed from Lake Maryūṭ; as a result, an airport located some 30 miles (50 km) southwest of the city at Burj al-ʿArab (Burg el-ʿArab) was opened to receive international flights in 2000. Another international airport, funded by private investment and designed to attract European tourists to Egypt’s Mediterranean beaches, opened at Al-ʿAlamayn in 2005.
More than half of Egypt’s foreign trade passes through the city’s two main commercial harbours, Alexandria and nearby Al-Dukhaylah. Much of the country’s oil, gas, and cotton are exported through these ports, as are traditional items such as fruits, vegetables, perfumes, and a variety of finished goods. By far the largest import is grain. Improvements have been implemented to relieve congestion, which can be severe. Egypt’s dependence on Alexandria’s ports has diminished somewhat with the opening of new container-handling facilities at Damietta (Dumyāṭ) and the development of ports along the coast of the Red Sea.
In 1890, Alexandria became the first fully constituted municipality in Egypt. Based upon an earlier organization formed by the foreign export merchants, the municipality enjoyed a high degree of autonomy in directing urban development until its suspension in 1926 and its reorganization by the Egyptian government in 1935. The liquidation of municipal autonomy was the prelude to an increasingly centralized control of urban administration through the governorate. Since the revolution led by Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1952, the president of the republic has appointed the governor, who is assisted by an elected local council; the governorate is responsible to the Ministry of Local Affairs.
In terms of city services, Alexandria is generally on a par with other urban governorates of Egypt, providing electricity and pure drinking water to all but a small percentage of homes. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, a number of high-profile programs to improve municipal services and refurbish the city’s image were implemented. Significant improvements have been made to the city’s waste-management infrastructure, and some services have been privatized. However, pollution of the beaches is a continuing health hazard. The city has been blamed for pumping vast quantities of sewage into the Mediterranean, although efforts have been made to control the release of untreated effluent.
Alexandrians receive medical services at a number of private and public clinics and hospitals; among these are the Alexandria Fever Hospital and a medical complex in Al-Shāṭibī (El-Shatbi) providing pediatric and gynecological care. Located to the east of the Bibliotheca Alexandrina, the complex was the focus of debate in the early 21st century, when it was rumoured there were plans to demolish the unattractive yet important structure.
The state supervises education, as is the rule throughout Egypt. The state system is divided into primary, preparatory, and secondary schools, and advanced education is available in university faculties and technical institutes. Alexandria University (1942), the principal public university, lies just east of the city centre. Instruction is generally given in Arabic, although English is an important second language and is widely used in a number of professional programs. A private, francophone, international university named in honour of the famous Senegalese statesman  Léopold Senghor was inaugurated in 1990.
Prior to 1952, Alexandria had a large number of private schools supported by various national and religious communities. Perhaps the most notable among these was Victoria College, an elite British institution founded in 1902. Its many famous students have included the Arab nationalist historian and advocate George Antonius (1891–1942) and King Ḥussein of Jordan.
Alexandria’s most important museum, the Greco-Roman Museum, situated behind the Municipality Building on Ṭarīq al-Ḥurriyyah, is noted for its fine collection of antiquities, most of which come from finds in or near the city. Renewed interest in the Classical period has revived archaeological exploration, which is focusing on Kawm al-Dikkah and the underwater site of the Pharos lighthouse. The Museum of Fine Art, located across the railway line from the city’s stadium, presents exhibitions of modern and local art. In addition, the royal palace at Al-Muntazah has spacious public gardens and access to the Mediterranean.
The Bibliotheca Alexandrina has also been an important addition to the city’s cultural menu. The idea of reviving the ancient library was first proposed in 1972 by Mostafa El-Abbadi, a professor at Alexandria University. The Egyptian government decided to sponsor the project, and it received international publicity and support through UNESCO. Opened in 2002, the Bibliotheca Alexandrina—located adjacent to Alexandria University and near the site of the ancient structure—contains a working library, a repository for manuscripts, a planetarium, museums, art galleries, and conference facilities.

## Britannica: Mostafa El-Abbadi | Biography & Facts | Britannica
Mostafa El-Abbadi (born October 10, 1928, Cairo, Egypt—died February 13, 2017, Alexandria) was an Egyptian historian who was regarded as the leading Egyptian scholar of the Greco-Roman world and was the visionary who conceived of and successfully pushed for a revival of the Library of Alexandria in the form of the Bibliotheca Alexandrina.
Abbadi graduated (1951) from the University of Alexandria and earned (1960) a doctorate in ancient history from the University of Cambridge. He returned to the University of Alexandria as a lecturer and later became a professor of Greco-Roman studies. He particularly focused on the Library of Alexandria of Classical times and made himself an authority on the institution, which had been the first that was intended to be a repository of all the world’s knowledge.
In a 1972 lecture at the University of Alexandria, Abbadi declared that the creation of a modern version of the great universal library should be undertaken. He then began developing plans for such an institution. Over time he was able to persuade the governor of Al-Iskandariyyah and the government of Egypt to support the project. In 1986 UNESCO agreed to help, and the  cornerstone for the new library was laid in 1988.
The Bibliotheca Alexandrina, a cylindrical building designed by the Norwegian architecture company Snøhetta, opened in 2002 with space for some eight million books on seven cascading levels, four museums, a planetarium, several galleries, and an enormous reading room. Abbadi donated a 16th-century copy of the Codex Justinianus (Code of Justinian) to the Bibliotheca. Abbadi wrote Life and Fate of the Ancient Library of Alexandria (1990) and the Encyclopædia Britannica’s entry on the Library of Alexandria. In 1996 he was elected president of the Archaeological Society of Alexandria, and he was later made honorary president.
