
# Wikipedia: Coptic Museum
The Coptic Museum is a museum in Coptic Cairo, Egypt with the largest collection of Coptic Christian artifacts in the world. It was founded by Marcus Simaika in 1908 to house Coptic antiquities. The museum traces the history of Egypt from its beginnings to the present day. It was erected on 8,000 square meter land offered by the Coptic Orthodox Church, under the guardianship of Pope Cyril V.
The Coptic museum houses the world's most important examples of Coptic art.

History
In 1908, after receiving approval and a number of silver antiquities from Patriarch Cyril V and raising funds by public subscription, Marcus Simaika Pasha built the Coptic Museum and inaugurated it on 14 March 1910. The Coptic community was generous in their support of the museum, donating many vestments, frescoes, and icons. In 1931 the Coptic Museum became a state museum, under the jurisdiction of the Department of Antiquities, and in 1939 the collection of Christian antiquities in the Egyptian Museum was moved there. These were housed in the New Wing, completed in 1944. Because of damage, the Old Wing was closed in 1966, and the entire museum was renovated between 1983 and 1984. The foundations of the museum were strengthened and reinforced between 1986 and 1988, which helped the museum survive the 1992 earthquake. Further renovations took place in 2005–06.
Marcus Simaika Pasha was followed by Dr Togo Mina and then by Dr Pahor Labib, the first to have the title of Director of the Coptic Museum. Besides the museum buildings, there are gardens and courtyards and the area is surrounded by old Coptic churches. There are six churches, some which have origins as early as the 5th century AD. These old edifices include the (Hanging church) of the Virgin Mary and the church of St. Sergius.
The Coptic Museum's grounds are a peaceful and tranquil place. Its airy building is paved with mosaics and decorated with old mashrabiya screens. The museum houses an extensive collection of objects from the Christian era, which links the Pharaonic and Islamic periods. The artefacts on display illustrate a period of Egypt's history which is often neglected and they show how the artistic development of the Coptic culture was influenced by the pharaonic, Graeco-Roman and Islamic cultures. The museum was renovated in the early 1980 with two new annexes, which with the original aisles, houses the collection of 16,000 artefacts arranged in chronological order through twelve sections.

Collection
The Coptic Museum contains the world's largest collection of Coptic artifacts and artwork. Coptic monuments display a rich mixture of Egyptian, Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Axumite and Ottoman traditions, linking ancient and Islamic Egypt.
The objects are grouped into different mediums, such as stonework, woodwork, metalwork, textiles and manuscripts. The total number of objects on display is around 15,000.

Nag Hammadi Library
The Coptic Museum also houses a corpus of 1,200 Nag Hammadi manuscripts in a library open to specialist researchers only.

See also
Coptic art
Coptic Orthodox Church
Coptic history
Coptology

References
Works cited
Kamil, Jill (1990). Coptic Egypt: History and a Guide (2nd ed.). Cairo: American University in Cairo. ISBN 978-977-424-242-7.

Further reading
Meinardus, Otto F. A. (1999). Two Thousand Years of Coptic Christianity (2nd ed.). Cairo: American University in Cairo. ISBN 978-977-424-511-4.
Simaika, Samir M. (2010). Markus Pasha Simaika. His life and times. (1st ed.) Cairo: Farid Atiya Press.

External links

Official Coptic Museum website (in English)
Coptic Museum's Facebook Page
Page about the museum on Coptic Cairo website (in English)
Kamil, Jill (January 2006). "Coptic Museum countdown". Al-Ahram Weekly. Archived from the original on 25 March 2013.
Kamel, Seif. Coptic Museum in Cairo. Tour Egypt.
# Britannica:
The Coptic Museum in Cairo, located in Miṣr al-Qadīmah, specializes in pre-
Islamic icons, textiles, and stones. Coptic art, generally, is associated with
the Greek- and Egyptian-speaking Christian peoples of Egypt from about the 3rd
to the 12th century CE and is reflected in the stone reliefs, wood carvings,
and wall paintings of Egyptian monasteries.

The adjective Coptic, when applied to art, is specific to the Christian art of
Egypt from the time when the Christian faith was recognized as the established
religion among both the Greek-speaking and Egyptian-speaking elements of the
population. The museum's collection represents Cairene and Egyptian heritage.

Coptic art evolved from the late antique art of Egypt. The stylistic flatness
of Coptic art moves away from a naturalistic rendering of the human form,
features, and of animal and plant ornamentation. Outline and detail are
simplified, and the number of motifs is limited.



## Britannica: Egyptian Museum | Artifacts, Antiquities, History, & Facts | Britannica
Egyptian Museum,  museum of Egyptian antiquities in Cairo, which was founded in the 19th century by the French Egyptologist Auguste Mariette and which housed the world’s most valuable collection of its kind into the 21st century.
The Egyptian Museum was founded in 1858 at Būlāq, moved to Al-Jīzah (Giza), and settled in its present site in downtown Cairo in 1897–1902. The building was designed by the French architect Marcel Dourgnon in Neoclassical style and was the first purpose-built museum in the Middle East and North Africa.
The museum is unique in its presentation of the whole history of Egyptian civilization, especially of antiquities of the Pharaonic and Greco-Roman periods. On the ground floor are a number of large and heavy objects, including colossal figures situated inside the middle atrium. At the peak of its collection, the museum stored more than 100,000 items. Most of the artifacts were never displayed, however, because of the museum’s crowded and small space.
Treasures include reliefs, sarcophagi, papyri, funerary art and the contents of various tombs, jewelry, ornaments of all kinds, and other objects. The Tanis collection—sometimes compared in spectacle to that of Tutankhamun’s tomb, although discovered later and less well known—boasts silver coffins, gold masks, royal sarcophagi, and jewelry. There are granite figures of Queen Hatshepsut, as well as colossal figures of Amenhotep IV (Akhenaton) from Karnak. The museum also houses a small but fine collection of Fayum portraits from Hellenistic and Roman times.
In the late 2010s the Egyptian government began transferring tens of thousands of the museum’s items to the larger Grand Egyptian Museum under construction in nearby Giza, including thousands of pieces from the tomb of Tutankhamun. Other objects moved to the new museum from the museum in Cairo included a block statue of Queen Hetepheres, one of the earliest examples of its type, and a black granite sculpture of Queen Nefertiti. A sculpture of Amenhotep II, showing him as the god Tenen, was also moved.

## Britannica: Cairo - Cultural, Historical, Educational | Britannica
Cairo has long been a cultural capital of the Middle East, as well as the region’s chief mass media centre. For many centuries it was also the site of the region’s major religious and cultural institutions. During the 19th century a number of European cultural institutions, such as theatres, were introduced. The original Baroque Opera House, situated on Opera Square in downtown Cairo, was destroyed by fire in 1971; it was replaced by a modern structure on the southern tip of Jazīrah, completed in 1988.
Egypt has long been known for its musical and dramatic talent and as the site of a renaissance in Arab theatre. The majority of Arabic films are produced by Egyptian companies in Cairo, and leading cinema stars and many popular musical entertainers of the Arab world make Cairo their headquarters. Egyptian radio and television series are broadcast throughout the Arab world, and a number of important newspapers are published in Cairo. Among the oldest and most widely circulated of these is Al-Ahrām, established in 1875, although other dailies headquartered in the city—including Al-Jumhūriyyah, Al-Akhbār, Al-Masāʾ, and Al-Maṣrī al-Yawm—enjoy large readerships as well.
Cairene and Egyptian heritage are represented in the collections of the city’s rich series of museums. Located on Tahrir Square, the Egyptian Museum displays a vast collection of antiquities, and visitors can view a number of pharaonic treasures such as the colossal statue of Amenhotep III and his wife Tiy in the atrium. The Coptic Museum in Miṣr al-Qadīmah specializes in pre-Islamic icons, textiles, and stones, and the Museum of Islamic Art in Bāb al-Khalq displays Mamluk Qurʾāns and objects of wood, brass, inlay, and glass. The War Museum, located at the Citadel, is also in Cairo, and the Ottoman-style Manyāl Palace Museum stands on the island of Al-Rawḍah. The mosques of Cairo themselves often offer as rich a historical store as the city’s museums.
The Cairo Zoological Gardens, in Giza, contain extensive collections of rare tropical animals in a garden setting. In addition to the sporting facilities on Jazīrah, including racetracks, swimming clubs, and gardens, there is a racetrack at Heliopolis. Naṣr City is the site of the Cairo Stadium and has numerous playing fields. Other recreation and entertainment options include sailboat trips up the Nile, as well as numerous riverfront cafés, restaurant boats, and nightclubs.
Some 5,000 years ago Memphis—today lying mainly in ruins approximately 15 miles (24 km) southwest of Cairo—was a thriving metropolis; about 2,000 years ago the Romans occupied a town on the site of present-day Cairo called Babylon (later the Miṣr al-Qadīmah quarter). The seed from which contemporary Cairo later sprang was the town of Al-Fusṭāṭ, founded as a military encampment in 641 ce by ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ, an Arab general and administrator who brought Islam to Egypt. Successive dynasties added royal suburbs (including Al-ʿAskar, founded in 750 by the Umayyads, and Al-Qaṭāʾiʿ, founded in 870 by Aḥmad ibn Ṭūlūn) to the increasingly prosperous commercial and industrial port city of Al-Fusṭāṭ. Little remains of these early developments in the southern part of the city, except the tower of Trajan (dating to 130 ce), the mosques of ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ (founded in 641–642) and Aḥmad ibn Ṭūlūn (completed in 878), and the partially excavated mounds covering the site of Al-Fusṭāṭ.
In 969 the Fatimids, adherents of a Shiʿi sect (see Ismāʿīliyyah) and opponents of Sunni Abbasid rule, invaded Egypt. The conquering general, Jawhar, established a new, rectangular, walled city to the northeast of the existing settlements. Initially named Al-Manṣūriyyah, the city was given its present name, Al-Qāhirah (“The Victorious”), in 973/974 in celebration of the arrival of the Fatimid caliph al-Muʿizz, who made the city the capital centre of a dynasty that lasted for two centuries. Al-Qāhirah and Al-Fusṭāṭ coexisted until 1168, when the unfortified city of Al-Fusṭāṭ was set on fire to protect Cairo from the Crusaders. The Crusaders were driven off by a Sunni army from Syria, after which the victorious commander, Saladin, founded the Ayyubid dynasty, subsequently controlling a vast empire from Cairo.
Although Al-Fusṭāṭ was partially rebuilt, it was Cairo that was transformed from a royal enclave into an imperial metropolis. Saladin further extended the city’s 11th-century walls, of which the northern and southern walls and three main gates—Bāb al-Futūḥ, Bāb al-Naṣr, and Bāb Zuwaylah—are still extant; he also constructed a citadel on the Muqaṭṭam spur (now dominated by the Muḥammad ʿAlī Mosque). After Baybars I became the first Mamluk sultan of undisputed legitimacy in 1260, Cairo served as the capital of the Mamluk empire, which governed Egypt, much of the Levant, and parts of the Fertile Crescent until 1517.
Medieval Cairo reached its apogee during the Mamluk era. By about 1340 Cairo had become the largest city in Africa, Europe, and Asia Minor, with almost half a million people living in an area five times greater than the original Fatimid walled city. As a key link in the profitable east-west spice trade and the recipient of tribute from a wealthy empire, the city thrived both intellectually and culturally: the venerable al-Azhar University—a principal seat of Islamic learning—as well as most of the city’s greatest architectural masterpieces were built during this period.
In the mid-14th century, decline set in—sporadically at first and then more precipitously. The city’s population was decimated by plagues, including the outbreak of the Black Death in 1348. In addition, the spice trade monopoly was broken following Vasco da Gama’s voyage from Portugal to India (1497–99), undermining Cairo’s economic preeminence. Finally, political autonomy was lost to the Turks, who after 1517 reduced Cairo to a provincial capital in the Ottoman Empire. In 1798, when Napoleon and his troops arrived in Cairo, fewer than 300,000 people were living in the city and its two port suburbs, Miṣr al-Qadīmah and Būlāq.

## Britannica: Coptic art | Byzantine, Egyptian & Christian | Britannica
Coptic art,  any of the visual arts associated with the Greek- and Egyptian-speaking Christian peoples of Egypt from about the 3rd to the 12th century ad. It is essentially reflected in the stone reliefs, wood carvings, and wall paintings of the monasteries of Egypt. It is, nonetheless, common practice to include within Coptic art such means of expression as the so-called Coptic textiles, which have no religious intent.
The style of Coptic Christian art evolved from the late antique art of Egypt. Economic conditions doubtless played a major role in the emergence of a freer, more popular style of art; the lack of an extensive patronage system is evident in many aspects of Coptic art, the emphasis on nonmonumental art, the avoidance of costly materials, and the dearth of skilled craftsmen with extensive training among them. The stylistic flatness of Coptic art shows a movement away from a naturalistic rendering of the human form and features and of animal and plant ornamentation. Outline and detail are simplified, and the number of motifs is limited. See also sculpture, Western: Coptic Egypt; Western painting: Coptic Egypt.

## Britannica: Western sculpture - Coptic, Egypt, Art | Britannica
Strictly speaking, the adjective Coptic, when it is applied to art, should be confined to the Christian art of Egypt from the time when the Christian faith may be recognized as the established religion of the country among both the Greek-speaking and Egyptian-speaking elements of the population. In this sense Coptic art is essentially that reflected in the stone reliefs, wood carvings, and wall paintings of the monasteries of Egypt, the earliest foundations of which date from the 4th and 5th centuries ce. It is, however, common practice to include within Coptic art all forms of artistic expression that, like the so-called Coptic textiles, need have no religious intent or purpose. The term has also been further extended to denote stylistic characteristics that can be traced back to the 2nd and 3rd centuries ce and perhaps earlier.
A specifically Christian art was slow in developing: when it did emerge, it was not the product of a school of Christian artists inventing new forms of expression. It continued the style current in the country, evolving from the late antique art of Egypt, in which themes derived from Hellenistic and Roman art may or may not have been given new allegorical significance. There is little direct legacy from the art of pharaonic Egypt either in the style of execution or in the choice of decorative themes. The most obvious survival in Christian iconography is the peculiar looped form of cross derived from the ancient Egyptian writing of the word for life (ankh). Less convincing is the connection postulated between the concept of Maria lactans (representations of the Virgin nursing her child) and bronze and terra-cotta statues of the ancient Egyptian goddess Isis suckling the infant sun god Horus or between representations of saints on horseback and some late figures of the adult Horus in an identical pose.
The extent to which Egypt may have exerted a major creative influence on Christian art is uncertain in the absence of material remains of the Christian period from Alexandria, the great metropolis of Egypt from the time of the Ptolemies and a city that played an important and, at times, decisive role in the intellectual life of the early church. A series of Christian ivory carvings, of unrecorded provenance, is frequently referred to as Alexandrian on stylistic considerations and adduced as proof of a continuing artistic skill in the Hellenistic tradition.
Objects found in the hinterland depart from the Classical canons of proportion and mode of representation. Political and economic conditions in Egypt from the time of its incorporation in the Roman and, later, Byzantine empires doubtless account for much of the provincial appearance of Egyptian and Coptic art and the emergence of a freer, more popular folk style. Lack of the kind and degree of patronage that had been given by the pharaohs, Ptolemies, and, to some extent, Roman emperors to the old religion of Egypt meant an impoverishment of schools of skilled craftsmen, avoidance of costlier materials, and a decline in the high standard of finish. Particularly noticeable is the absence of carving in the round, of work of monumental scale, and of the use of the harder ornamental stones that had been characteristic of pharaonic art.
Characteristic Coptic stylistic features are to be observed in tombstones from the Delta site of Terenuthis. These depict the dead man frontally posed beneath a gabled pediment of mixed architectural style, hands extended at right angles from the body and bent upward from the elbow in the orans (praying) position, a pose that appeared frequently in the earliest Christian art in Rome. There is no firm evidence, however, that the community was Christian. Similarly, the series of architectural elements carved in relief from Oxyrhynchus and Heracleopolis may not all be from Christian buildings. The earlier material from Heracleopolis, dating probably from the 4th century, is notable for its figure subjects drawn from classical mythology, carved in a deep relief that leaves them almost freestanding, producing an effective play of light and shade. As such reliefs were painted, the absence of fine detail in the carving was less noticeable.
Much of the material available for a study of Coptic sculpture has not been found in context, and, in the absence of assured information concerning its provenance and of circumstantial evidence for dating (even in the cases of pieces from known sites), it is impossible to provide a detailed account of the development of Coptic sculpture. The most successful carvings are probably the impressive variety of decorated capitals, particularly from the monasteries of Apa Jeremias at Ṣaqqārah and of Apa Apollo at Bāwīṭ. Among them are basket-shaped examples decorated with plaitwork, vine and acanthus leaves, and animal heads. The form interprets a style introduced into Constantinople by the emperor Justinian I, and it is clear that, in the hinterland of Egypt, there was during the 6th century certain artistic influence on Coptic art from Byzantium, despite religious and political differences. Contemporary Byzantine influence seems to have been at work on other architectural elements at Bāwīṭ, as, for example, in the finely carved limestone pilaster depicting, on one side, a geometric and floral pattern surmounted by a saint and, on the other, vine scrolls and birds below an archangel.

## Britannica: Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria | History, Beliefs & Practices | Britannica
Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria,  Oriental Orthodox church and principal Christian church in predominantly Muslim Egypt. The people of Egypt before the Arab conquest in the 7th century identified themselves and their language in Greek as Aigyptios (Arabic qibṭ, Westernized as Copt). When Egyptian Muslims later ceased to call themselves Aigyptioi, the term became the distinctive name of the Christian minority. In the 19th and 20th centuries they began to call themselves Coptic Orthodox in order to distinguish themselves both from Copts who had converted to Roman Catholicism (see also Coptic Catholic Church) and from Eastern Orthodox, who are mostly Greek (see also Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria).
In the 4th and 5th centuries a theological conflict arose between the Copts and the Greek-speaking Romans, or Melchites, in Egypt. The Council of Chalcedon (451) rejected monophysite doctrine—the belief that Jesus Christ had only a divine, not a human, nature—and affirmed both his divinity and his humanity. The Melchites recognized the outcome of Chalcedon. The Coptic church, however, became one of the several Eastern churches that rejected the Christological language about the two natures of Christ agreed upon at Chalcedon. Yet while the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches denounced these Eastern churches as monophysite heretics, the Coptic church and other pre-Chalcedonian or (since the 20th century) Oriental Orthodox churches adopted a theological position called miaphysitism. Confessing the statement by St. Cyril of Alexandria (c. 375–444) proclaiming the “one incarnate nature of the Word” of God, miaphysites declared that both Christ’s humanity and divinity were equally present through the Incarnation in one single nature (hence the Greek prefix mia, “same”) as the Word made flesh. Rather than denying Christ’s humanity, as they were accused of doing, the Coptic and other miaphysite churches gave both his humanity and his divinity equal presence in the person of Christ.
After the Arab conquest of Egypt in the 7th century, the Copts ceased speaking Greek, and the language barrier added to the controversy. Various attempts at compromise by the Byzantine emperors came to naught. Later, the Arab caliphs, although they tended to favour those who adopted Islam, did not interfere much in the church’s internal affairs. The jizya, the tax levied upon non-Muslims living in an Islamic state, was abolished in the 18th century.
Arabic is now used in the services of the Coptic Orthodox Church for the lessons from the Bible and for many of the variable hymns; only certain short refrains that churchgoing people all understand are not in Arabic. The service books, using the liturgies attributed to St. Mark, St. Cyril of Alexandria, and St. Gregory of Nazianzus, are written in Coptic (the Bohairic dialect of Alexandria), with the Arabic text in parallel columns.
The Coptic Orthodox Church developed a democratic system of government after the 1890s. The patriarch and the 12 diocesan bishops, with the assistance of community councils in which the laity is well represented, regulate the finances of the churches and schools and the administration of the rules relating to marriage, inheritance, and other matters of personal status. When the patriarch dies, an electoral college, predominantly of laymen, selects three duly qualified monks at least 50 years of age as candidates for the office of patriarch. Among these three, the final choice is made by lot after prayer.
The highest-ranking bishop is the patriarch of Alexandria, who resides in Cairo; he is called the pope and claims apostolic authority for his office from St. Mark. The church has its own primary and secondary schools in many places in Egypt, as well as a strong Sunday-school movement for the religious education of children unable to go to Coptic schools. There is an Institute of Coptic Studies in Cairo, a theological college connected with the institute, and a Coptic museum; the teaching of the Coptic Orthodox Church has even become the basis of the syllabus used in the religious instruction of Christian children in government schools.
There are Coptic Orthodox churches in Jerusalem and in other areas of the Holy Land, built in the 19th and 20th centuries, as well as a Coptic bishopric in Khartoum, Sudan. The church also has a small presence in North America, Australia, and the United Kingdom. The Ethiopian, Armenian, and Syriac Orthodox churches are all Oriental Orthodox churches in communion with the Coptic Orthodox Church. The Oriental Orthodox churches were considered heretical for centuries by the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches. Since the late 20th century, however, the Coptic Orthodox Church, like other Oriental Orthodox churches, has entered into dialogue with both, resolving many theological disputes and garnering recognition as being doctrinally in the mainstream of orthodox Christianity.
