
# Wikipedia: Nilometer
A nilometer is a structure for measuring the Nile River's clarity and water level during the annual flood season in Egypt. There were three main types of nilometers, calibrated in Egyptian cubits: (1) a vertical column, (2) a corridor stairway of steps leading down to the Nile, and (3) a deep well with a culvert. If the water level was low, the fertility of the floodplain would suffer. If it was too high, the flooding would be destructive. There was a specific mark that indicated how high the flood should be if the fields were to get good soil.
Nilometers originated in pharaonic times, were also built in Roman times, and were highly prevalent in Islamic Egypt in Rashidun, Ummayad, Abbasid, Tulunid, Mamluk, Alawiyya and Republican periods, until the Aswan Dam rendered them obsolete in the 1960s.

Description
Between July and November, the reaches of the Nile running through Egypt would burst their banks and cover the adjacent floodplain. When the waters receded, around September or October, they left behind a rich alluvial deposit of exceptionally fertile black silt over the croplands. The akhet, or Season of the Inundation, was one of the three seasons into which the ancient Egyptians divided their year.
The annual flood was of great importance to Egyptian civilization. A moderate inundation was a vital part of the agricultural cycle; however, a lighter inundation than normal would cause famine, and too much flood water would be equally disastrous, washing away much of the infrastructure built on the flood plain. Records from AD 622–999 indicate that, on average, 28% of the years saw an inundation that fell short of expectations.

Across Egypt various nilometers could be found that recorded readings of the Nile's annual levels. A fragment of a recovered Egyptian stele "Royal Annals of the Old Kingdom" known as the "Palermo Stone" deemed to be from the times of the First Dynasty around 3,000 B.C.E. The Palermo Stone reports systems of measurements utilizing units such as cubits, palms, and fingers.
The ability to predict the volume of the coming inundation was part of the mystique of the ancient Egyptian priesthood. The same skill also played a political and administrative role, since the quality of the year's flood was used to determine the levels of tax to be paid. This is where the nilometer came into play, with priests monitoring the day-to-day level of the river and announcing the awaited arrival of the summer flood.
Religious attributes related to the Nile intertwined with the ideology or belief in Ma'at (a system of natural balance). Nilometers were accessible to only members of the city's priests and nobles. The restriction on who may access these structures ensured both accountability in proper readings and political control for the religious communities and ruling classes.

Designs
The simplest nilometer design is a vertical column submerged in the waters of the river, with marked intervals indicating the depth of the water. One that follows this simple design, albeit housed in an elaborate and ornate stone structure, can still be seen on the island of Roda in central Cairo (30.0069°N 31.2250°E﻿ / 30.0069; 31.2250﻿ (Rhoda Island nilometer)). This nilometer visible today dates as far back as AD 861, when the Abbasid caliph al-Mutawakkil ordered its construction, overseen by the astronomer al-Farghani. Another nilometer had been ordered in 715 by Usāma b. Zayd b. ʿAdī, who was in charge of collecting the land tax (kharaj) in Egypt for the Umayyad caliph Sulaymān ibn ʿAbd al-Malik.

The second nilometer design comprises a flight of stairs leading down into the water, with depth markings along the walls. The best known example of this kind can be seen on Elephantine in Aswan, where a stairway of 52 steps leads down to a doorway at the Nile. This location was also particularly important, since for much of Egyptian history, Elephantine marked Egypt's southern border and was therefore the first place where the onset of the annual flood was detected.
The most elaborate design involved a canal or culvert that led from the riverbank – often running for a considerable distance – and then fed a well, tank, or cistern. These nilometer wells were most frequently located within the confines of temples, where only the priests and rulers were allowed access. A particularly fine example, with a deep, cylindrical well and a culvert opening in the surrounding wall, can be seen at the Temple of Kom Ombo, to the north of Aswan.

History
While nilometers originated in Pharaonic times, they continued to be used by the later civilizations that held sway in Egypt. Some were constructed in Roman times. In the 20th century, the Nile's annual inundation was first greatly reduced, and then eliminated entirely, with the construction of the Aswan Dams. While the Aswan High Dam's impact on Egypt and its agriculture has been controversial for other, more complex reasons, it has also had the additional effect of rendering the nilometer obsolete.

Roda Island
The first nilometer on Roda Island was constructed by Usama bin Zayd bin Adl before Jumada II, 96 AH (February 715), during the reign of the Umayyad caliph al-Walid. The 14th-century Arabic historian Maqrīzī claims that the construction cost 24,000 dirhams. During the reign of Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik, Usama wrote to the caliph informing him of the dilapidated state of the nilometer. He received a reply ordering him to construct a new one, which he did in 97 AH (5 September 715—24 August 716).: 296  Yaqut al-Hamawi, writing in the 12th–13th centuries, claims that in the beginning of year 247 AH (March 861), during Yazid ibn Abd Allah al-Turki's governorship of Egypt, the Abbasid caliph al-Mutawakkil had the 'new' nilometer constructed and ordered that the privilege of measuring the river 'be taken away from the Christians.' The governor then appointed a man from Basra named Abu'r-Raddad who had emigrated to Egypt and taught hadith. He died in 266 AH (879/80), with Yaqut claiming 'the supervision of the Nilometer has remained in the hands of his descendants until the present day' (which would have been around 1225 for the author).: 297  Ibn Khallikan, a 13th-century historian, gives a different account of this nilometer, recounting that a 'pious' muezzin in the old Mosque of Amr wished to carve inscriptions in various places of the nilometer. After consulting with Yazid ibn Abd Allah, Sulayman ibn Wahb and Hasan al-Khadim, the muezzin proposed to inscribe various Qu'ranic passages in the name of al-Mutawakkil. Sulayman ibn Wahb then wrote to the caliph, who replied in writing to choose verses of the Qu'ran 'most appropriate' to the nilometer and to inscribe the caliph's name.: 297–298 
Ibn Khallikan writes that the architect of the nilometer was Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Hasib. Abu Ja'far al-Katib and Ibn Abi Usaybi'a mention that Ahmad ibn Kathir al-Farghani was sent to Fustat by al-Mutawakkil to supervise the construction. Abu al-Mahasin Yusuf (d. 1604) makes the same statement but calls him Muhammad ibn Kathir al-Farghani (full name: Abu'l-Abbas Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Kathir al-Farghani). For this reason, Gaston Wiet and Creswell argue that the al-Farghani and al-Hasib are the same person.: 303 
In 872–3 (259 AH), Ahmad ibn Tulun, the autonomous ruler of Egypt, would also have the nilometer restored. Al-Mutawakkil's name was removed from the Kufic inscription of the nilometer. K. A. C. Creswell states that the main inscription of the nilometer was probably tampered with by Ibn Tulun, saying "there can be little doubt that it was he who removed the name of the Abbasid Khalif." Ibn Tulun would however refrain from substituting his own name, with Creswell claiming as he did not feel sufficiently secure to do so. The first Tulunid Emir during 872-873 would spend 1,000 dinars on works carried out on the nilometer.: 298–299  Consequently, according to Abdul Rofik Bruno, the Nile's irrigation would be enhanced, and agricultural output increased.
Amr ibn al-As after the conquest of Egypt reported to the Caliph Umar that when the Nile rose to 14 cubits there was a sufficient harvest, 16 an abundant harvest, 17 being the most advantageous height of all, and that at 18, one-fourth of Egypt would be inundated and usually be followed by plague. The Baghdad doctor, Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi who traveled Egypt between 1192-1201 would also relate similar measurements. In the exceedingly low water levels of 1201 and 1202, the nilometer remained dry. In 1201, the year commenced with a rise in 2 cubits before rising an average 15¹⁶⁄₂₄ cubits. In 1202, the year began with 1½ cubits before rising to 15²³⁄₂₄ cubits.: 31–32  During the Abbasid Period, the nilometer was used to measure the river level and hence determine the rates of tax in Egypt.
In 1937, efforts to drain and excavate the nilometer were begun by Kamil Bey Ghalib, the Under-Secretary of State for Public Works, employing a new method used by Rothpletz and Lienhard. In this method, the mud could be removed completely and the structure examined.: 304

See also
Hunger stone

Notes
References

Abbeloos, Jean Baptiste; Lamy, Thomas Joseph, eds. (1877). Bar Hebraeus, Chronicon Ecclesiasticum (3 vols). Paris.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
# Britannica:
The ancient Egyptians used nilometers to record the level of the Nile River.
Nilometers were gauges often made of graduated scales cut in natural rocks or
stone walls.

## Nilometers

Nilometers were used to measure the height of the Nile River during its annual
floods. These floods were critical for agriculture, and the nilometers helped
predict the success of the upcoming harvest. If the flood was too low, there
would not be enough water for crops. If the flood was too high, it could
destroy fields and homes.

## Rhoda Island

While the provided search results mention nilometers in the context of ancient
Egypt, there is no specific information about a nilometer on Rhoda Island.



## Britannica: Nile River | Delta, Map, Basin, Length, Facts, Definition, Map, History, & Location | Britannica
Nile River,  the longest river in the world, called the father of African rivers. It rises south of the Equator and flows northward through northeastern Africa to drain into the Mediterranean Sea. It has a length of about 4,132 miles (6,650 kilometres) and drains an area estimated at 1,293,000 square miles (3,349,000 square kilometres). Its basin includes parts of Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Uganda, South Sudan, Ethiopia, Sudan, and the cultivated part of Egypt. Its most distant source is the Kagera River in Burundi.
The Nile is formed by three principal streams: the Blue Nile (Arabic: Al-Baḥr Al-Azraq; Amharic: Abay) and the Atbara (Arabic: Nahr ʿAṭbarah), which flow from the highlands of Ethiopia, and the White Nile (Arabic: Al-Baḥr Al-Abyad), the headstreams of which flow into Lakes Victoria and Albert.
The name Nile is derived from the Greek Neilos (Latin: Nilus), which probably originated from the Semitic root naḥal, meaning a valley or a river valley and hence, by an extension of the meaning, a river. The fact that the Nile—unlike other great rivers known to them—flowed from the south northward and was in flood at the warmest time of the year was an unsolved mystery to the ancient Egyptians and Greeks. The ancient Egyptians called the river Ar or Aur (Coptic: Iaro), “Black,” in allusion to the colour of the sediments carried by the river when it is in flood. Nile mud is black enough to have given the land itself its oldest name, Kem or Kemi, which also means “black” and signifies darkness. In the Odyssey, the epic poem written by the Greek poet Homer (7th century bce), Aigyptos is the name of the Nile (masculine) as well as the country of Egypt (feminine) through which it flows. The Nile in Egypt and Sudan is now called Al-Nīl, Al-Baḥr, and Baḥr Al-Nīl or Nahr Al-Nīl.
The Nile River basin, which covers about one-tenth of the area of the continent, served as the stage for the evolution and decay of advanced civilizations in the ancient world. On the banks of the river dwelled people who were among the first to cultivate the arts of agriculture and to use the plow. The basin is bordered on the north by the Mediterranean; on the east by the Red Sea Hills and the Ethiopian Plateau; on the south by the East African Highlands, which include Lake Victoria, a Nile source; and on the west by the less well-defined watershed between the Nile, Chad, and Congo basins, extending northwest to include the Marrah Mountains of Sudan, the Al-Jilf al-Kabīr Plateau of Egypt, and the Libyan Desert (part of the Sahara).
The availability of water from the Nile throughout the year, combined with the area’s high temperatures, makes possible intensive cultivation along its banks. Even in some of the regions in which the average rainfall is sufficient for cultivation, marked annual variations in precipitation often make cultivation without irrigation risky.
The Nile River is also a vital waterway for transport, especially at times when motor transport is not feasible—e.g., during the flood season. Improvements in air, rail, and highway facilities beginning in the 20th century, however, greatly reduced dependency on the waterway.

## Britannica: Nile River - Hydrology, Climate, Basin | Britannica
Almost no area within the Nile basin experiences a true equatorial or a true Mediterranean type of climate. While the Nile basin in Sudan and Egypt is rainless during the northern winter, its southern parts and the highlands of Ethiopia experience heavy rain—more than 60 inches (1,520 millimetres)—during the northern summer. Most of the region falls under the influence of the northeast trade winds between October and May, which causes the prevailing aridity of most of the basin.
Tropical climates with well-distributed rainfall are found in parts of the East African lakes region and southwestern Ethiopia. In the lake region there is little variation throughout the year in the mean temperature, which ranges from 60 to 80 °F (16 to 27 °C) depending on locality and altitude. Relative humidity, which varies similarly, is about 80 percent on the average. Similar climatic conditions prevail over the western and southern parts of South Sudan, which receive as much as 50 inches of rain spread over a nine-month period (March to November), the maximum occurring in August. The humidity reaches its highest at the peak of the rainy season and reaches its low level between January and March. Maximum temperatures are recorded during the dry season (December to February), and minimums occur in July and August.
To the north, the rainy season gets shorter, and the amount of rainfall decreases. The rainy season, which occurs in the south from April to October, is confined to July and August in south-central Sudan, where three seasons may be distinguished. The first of these is the pleasant, cool, dry winter, which occurs from December to February; this is followed by hot and very dry weather from March to June; and this is followed, in turn, by a hot rainy period from July to October. The minimum temperature occurs in January and the maximum in May or June, when it rises to a daily average of 105 °F (41 °C) in Khartoum. Only about 10 inches of rainfall occurs annually in the Al-Jazīrah area (between the White and Blue Nile rivers), as compared with more than 21 inches at Dakar, Senegal, which is at the same latitude. North of Khartoum less than five inches of rain falls annually, an amount insufficient for permanent settlement. In June and July parts of Sudan are frequently visited by squalls during which strong winds carry large quantities of sand and dust. These storms, which are of three to four hours duration, are called haboobs.
A desert-type climate exists over most of the remainder of the area north to the Mediterranean. The principal characteristics of northern Sudan and the desert of Egypt are aridity, a dry atmosphere, and a considerable seasonal, as well as diurnal, temperature range in Upper Egypt. Temperatures often surpass 100 °F (38 °C); in Aswān, for example, the average daily maximum in June is 117 °F (47 °C). Winter temperatures decrease to the north. Egypt has what could be called a winter season, which occurs from November to March, when the daily maximum temperature in Cairo is 68 to 75 °F (20 to 24 °C) and the night minimum is about 50 °F (10 °C). The rainfall in Egypt is of Mediterranean origin and falls mostly in the winter, the amount decreasing toward the south. From eight inches on the coast, it falls gradually to a little over an inch in Cairo and to less than an inch in Upper Egypt. During the spring, from March to June, depressions from the Sahara or along the coast travel east, causing dry southerly winds, which sometimes results in a condition called khamsin. These are sandstorms or dust storms during which the atmosphere becomes hazy; on occasion they may persist for three or four days, at the end of which the phenomenon of a “blue” sun may be observed.
The periodic rise of the Nile remained an unsolved mystery until the discovery of the role of the tropical regions in its regime. In effect, there was little detailed knowledge about the hydrology of the Nile before the 20th century, except for early records of the river level that the ancient Egyptians had made with the aid of nilometers (gauges formed by graduated scales cut in natural rocks or in stone walls), some of which still remain. Today, however, no other river of comparable size has a regime that is so well known. The discharge of the main stream, as well as the tributaries, is regularly measured.
The Nile swells in the summer, the floods rising as a result of the heavy tropical rains in Ethiopia. In South Sudan the flood begins as early as April, but the effect is not felt at Aswān, Egypt, until July. The water then starts to rise and continues to do so throughout August and September, with the maximum occurring in mid-September. At Cairo the maximum is delayed until October. The level of the river then falls rapidly through November and December. From March to May the level of the river is at its lowest. Although the flood is a fairly regular phenomenon, it occasionally varies in volume and date. Before it was possible to regulate the river, years of high or low flood—particularly a sequence of such years—resulted in crop failure, famine, and disease.
Following the river from its sources, an estimate can be made of the contribution of the various lakes and tributaries in the Nile flood.
Lake Victoria forms the first great natural reservoir of the Nile system. The heavy rainfall over the lake is nearly balanced by surface evaporation, and the outflow from the lake—some 812 billion cubic feet (23 billion cubic metres)—comes mostly from the rivers draining into it, particularly the Kagera. This water then flows via the Victoria Nile into Lake Kyoga, where there is little net loss of water, and then into Lake Albert. Water lost by evaporation is more than balanced by the rainfall over the lake and the inflow from other smaller streams, notably the Semliki. Thus, the annual outflow from Lake Albert to the Al-Jabal River is about 918 billion cubic feet.
In addition to the water it receives from the great lakes, the torrential tributaries of the Al-Jabal supply it with nearly 20 percent of its water. The discharge of the Al-Jabal varies little throughout the year because of the regulatory effect of the large swamps and lagoons of the Al-Sudd region. About half of its water is lost in this stage by seepage and evaporation, but the flow of the Sobat River into the main stream just upstream of Malakal nearly makes up for the loss.
The White Nile provides a regular supply of water throughout the year. During April and May, when the main stream is at its lowest level, more than 80 percent of its water comes from the White Nile. The White Nile obtains its water in roughly equal amounts from two main sources. The first source is the rainfall on the East African Plateau of the previous summer. The second source is the drainage of southwestern Ethiopia through the Sobat (contributed mainly by its two headstreams, the Baro and the Pibor) that enters the main stream below Al-Sudd. The annual flood of the Sobat, a consequence of the Ethiopian summer rains, is to a great extent responsible for the variations in the level of the White Nile. The rains that swell its upper valley begin in April and cause widespread inundation over the 200 miles of plains through which the river passes, thus delaying the arrival of the rainwater in its lower reaches until November–December. Relatively small amounts of the mud carried by the Sobat’s flood reach the White Nile.
The Blue Nile, the most important of the three great Ethiopian affluents, plays an overwhelming part in bringing the Nile flood to Egypt. It receives two tributaries in Sudan—the Rahad and the Dinder—both of which also originate in Ethiopia. The regime of the Blue Nile is distinguished from that of the White Nile by the more rapid passage of its floodwater into the main stream. The river level begins to rise in June, reaching a maximum level at Khartoum in about the first week in September.
The Atbara River draws its floodwater from the rains on the northern part of the Ethiopian Plateau, as does the Blue Nile. While the floods of the two streams occur at the same time, the Blue Nile is a perennial stream, while the Atbara, as mentioned, shrinks to a series of pools in the dry season.
The swelling of the Blue Nile causes the first floodwaters to reach central Sudan in May. The maximum is reached in August, after which the level falls again. The rise at Khartoum averages more than 20 feet. When the Blue Nile is in flood, it holds back the White Nile water, turning it into an extensive lake and delaying its flow. The Jabal al-Awliyāʾ Dam south of Khartoum increases this ponding effect.
The peak of the flood does not enter Lake Nasser until late July or August, when the average daily inflow from the Nile rises to some 25.1 billion cubic feet. Out of this amount the Blue Nile accounts for almost 70 percent, the Atbara more than 20 percent, and the White Nile 10 percent. In early May the inflow drops to its minimum; the total discharge of 1.6 billion cubic feet per day comes mainly from the White Nile and the remainder from the Blue Nile. On the average, about 85 percent of the water in Lake Nasser comes from the Ethiopian Plateau, and the rest is contributed by the East African Lake Plateau system. Lake Nasser has an enormous storage capacity—more than 40 cubic miles (about 168 cubic kilometres)—although the content of the reservoir varies with the extent of the annual flood upstream. Because it is situated in a very hot and dry region, however, Lake Nasser can lose up to 10 percent of its volume to evaporation annually when it is full, decreasing to about one-third that amount when it is at minimum capacity.
