
# Wikipedia: Aswan Low Dam
The Aswan Low Dam or Old Aswan Dam is a gravity masonry buttress dam on the Nile River in Aswan, Egypt. The dam was built by the British at the former first cataract of the Nile, and is located about 1000 km up-river and 690 km (direct distance) south-southeast of Cairo. When initially constructed between 1899 and 1902, nothing of its scale had ever been attempted; on completion, it was the largest masonry dam in the world. The dam was designed to provide storage of annual floodwater and augment dry season flows to support greater irrigation development and population growth in the lower Nile. The dam, originally limited in height by conservation concerns, worked as designed, but provided inadequate storage capacity for planned development and was raised twice: between 1907 and 1912 and again between 1929 and 1933. These heightenings still did not meet irrigation demands and in 1946 it was nearly over-topped in an effort to maximize pool elevation. This led to the investigation and construction of the Aswan High Dam 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) upstream.

Background
The earliest recorded attempt to build a dam near Aswan was in the 11th century, when the Arab polymath and engineer Ibn al-Haytham (known as Alhazen in the West) was summoned to Egypt by the Fatimid Caliph, Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, to regulate the flooding of the Nile. After his field work convinced him of the impracticality of this scheme, and fearing the Caliph's anger, he feigned madness. He was kept under house arrest from 1011 until al-Hakim's death in 1021, during which time he wrote his influential Book of Optics.

Construction
Constructing the dam at Aswan was known to result in the flooding of Philae. Public Works Department engineers were instructed to go ahead with the project even if a different site could not be found. Following their 1882 victory of the Anglo-Egyptian War leading to the occupation of Egypt, the British began construction of the first dam across the Nile in 1898. Construction lasted until 1902, and it was opened on 10 December 1902, by Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn. The project was designed by Sir William Willcocks and involved several eminent engineers of the time, including Sir Benjamin Baker and Sir John Aird, whose firm, John Aird & Co., was the main contractor. Capital and financing were furnished by Ernest Cassel.
The Old Aswan Dam was designed as a gravity-buttress dam; the buttress sections accommodate numerous gates, which were opened yearly to pass the flood and its nutrient-rich sediments, but without retaining any yearly storage. The dam was constructed of rubble masonry and faced with red ashlar granite. When constructed, the Old Aswan Dam was the largest masonry dam in the world. The design also included a navigation lock of similar construction on the western bank, which allowed shipping to pass upstream as far as the second cataract, whereas a portage overland was previously required. At the time of its construction, nothing of such scale had ever been attempted.

Heightening
Initial limitations were imposed on the dam's height, due to concern for the Philae Temple. The initial construction was found to be inadequate for development needs, and the height of the dam was raised in two phases: 5 metres (16 ft) between 1907 and 1912 and 9 metres (30 ft) between 1929 and 1933. Generation of electricity was added. The first phase was supervised by Sir Benjamin Baker, but much of the detailed work was undertaken by Murdoch MacDonald.
With its final raising (designed and supervised by MacDonald's firm, Sir M MacDonald & Partners), the dam is 1,950 metres (6,400 ft) in length, with a crest level 36 metres (118 ft) above the original riverbed; the dam provides the main route for traffic between the city and the airport. With the construction of the High Dam upstream, the Old Dam's ability to pass the flood's sediments was lost, as was the serviceability provided by the locks. The previous Old Dam reservoir level was also lowered and now provides control of tailwater for the High Dam.

Power plants
The Aswan Low Dam supports two hydroelectric power plants, Aswan I (1960) and Aswan II (1985–1986). Aswan I contains 7 X 40 megawatts (54,000 hp) generators with Kaplan turbines for a combined capacity of 280 megawatts (380,000 hp) and is located west of the dam. Aswan II contains 4 x 67.5 megawatts (90,500 hp) generators for an installed capacity of 270 megawatts (360,000 hp) and is located at the toe of the dam.

See also
Energy in Egypt

Further reading
Perennial irrigation and flood protection for Egypt. Reports of the Technical Commission on Reservoirs with a note by W.E. Garstin, under Secretary of State, Public Works Department. (1894) National Printing Office, Cairo.
Sidney Peel, The Binding of the Nile and the new Soudan, Oxford 1904. Discusses 'Assouan' Dam and Nile River development.
The Assuan Dam, Journal of the Royal African Society, Vol. 12, No. 46, January, 1913
Hanbury Brown, Irrigation; its principles and practice as a branch of engineering, Third Edition, London. 1920

References
 Media related to Aswan Low Dam at Wikimedia Commons
# Britannica:
The Aswan Low Dam, also known as the Old Aswan Dam, is located 6 km (4 miles)
downstream from the Aswan High Dam. Completed in 1902, it was one of the
largest dams in the world at the time. The dam's crest was raised in 1912 and
again in 1933.

### Dimensions and Capacity

The Aswan Low Dam is 2,142 metres (7,027 feet) long. It can hold back
approximately 4.9 billion cubic metres (174.2 billion cubic feet) of water
from the Nile flood's tail in late autumn.

### Features

The dam has a series of four locks to facilitate navigation. It also has 180
sluices that formerly passed the entire Nile flood with its heavy silt load.
Additionally, it is equipped with a hydroelectric plant that has an installed
power of more than 345 megawatts.



## Britannica: Aswan High Dam | Description, History, Capacity, Problems, & Facts | Britannica
Aswan High Dam,  rock-fill dam across the Nile River at Aswān, Egypt, completed in 1970 (and formally inaugurated in January 1971) at a cost of about $1 billion. The Aswan High Dam yields enormous benefits to the economy of Egypt. For the first time in history, the annual Nile flood is under human control. The dam impounds the floodwaters, releasing them when needed to maximize their utility on irrigated land, to water hundreds of thousands of new hectares, to improve navigation both above and below Aswān, and to generate enormous amounts of hydroelectric power (the dam’s 12 turbines can generate 10 billion kilowatt-hours annually). The dam’s reservoir also supports a fishing industry.
The dam is 111 metres (364 feet) high, with a crest length of 3,830 metres (12,562 feet) and a volume of 44,300,000 cubic metres (57,940,000 cubic yards). It impounds a reservoir, Lake Nasser, that has a gross capacity of 169 billion cubic metres (5.97 trillion cubic feet). The reservoir has a depth of 90 metres (300 feet) and averages 22 km (14 miles) in width. Of the Nile’s total annual discharge, some 74 billion cubic metres (2.6 trillion cubic feet) of water have been allocated by treaty between Egypt and Sudan, with about 55.5 billion cubic metres (1.96 trillion cubic feet) apportioned to Egypt and the remainder to Sudan. Lake Nasser backs up the Nile about 320 km (200 miles) in Egypt and almost 160 km (100 miles) farther upstream (south) in Sudan.
The creation of the dam’s reservoir necessitated the costly relocation of the ancient Egyptian temple complex of Abu Simbel, which would otherwise have been submerged. Ninety thousand Egyptian fellahin (peasants) and Sudanese Nubian nomads had to be relocated. Fifty thousand Egyptians were transported to the Kawm Umbū valley, 50 km (30 miles) north of Aswān, to form a new agricultural zone called Nubaria, and most of the Sudanese were resettled around Khashm al-Qirbah, Sudan.
In addition to the human and archaeological costs, the Aswan High Dam has gradually decreased the fertility and, hence, the productivity of Egypt’s riverside agricultural lands. Because of the dam’s complete control of the Nile’s annual flooding, much of the flood and its load of rich fertilizing silt is now impounded in reservoirs and canals, and the silt is thus no longer deposited by the Nile’s rising waters on farmlands. Egypt’s annual application of about 1 million tons of artificial fertilizers is an inadequate substitute for the 40 million tons of silt formerly deposited annually by the Nile flood.
The Aswan Low Dam, or Old Aswan Dam, was completed in 1902, with its crest raised in 1912 and 1933, and lies  6 km (4 miles) downstream from the Aswan High Dam. It holds back about 4.9 billion cubic metres (174.2 billion cubic feet) of water from the tail of the Nile flood in late autumn. Once one of the largest dams in the world, it is 2,142 metres (7,027 feet) long and is pierced by 180 sluices that formerly passed the whole Nile flood, with its heavy load of silt.

## Britannica: Nile River - Dams, Reservoirs, Egypt | Britannica
In 1843 it was decided to build a series of diversion dams (barrages or weirs) across the Nile at the head of the delta about 12 miles downstream from Cairo, so as to raise the level of water upstream to supply the irrigation canals and to regulate navigation. This delta barrage scheme was not fully completed until 1861, after which it was extended and improved; it may be regarded as marking the beginning of modern irrigation in the Nile valley. The Zifta Barrage, nearly halfway along the Damietta branch of the deltaic Nile, was added to this system in 1901. In 1902 the Asyūṭ Barrage, more than 200 miles upstream from Cairo, was completed. This was followed in 1909 by the barrage at Isnā (Esna), about 160 miles above Asyūṭ, and in 1930 by the barrage at Najʿ Hammādī, 150 miles above Asyūṭ.
The first dam at Aswān was constructed between 1899 and 1902; it has a series of four locks to allow navigation. The dam has twice been enlarged—first between 1908 and 1911 and again between 1929 and 1934—thus raising the water level and increasing the dam’s capacity. It is also equipped with a hydroelectric plant with an installed power of more than 345 megawatts.
The Aswan High Dam is located about 600 miles upstream from Cairo and 4 miles upstream from the first Aswān dam. It is built at a place where the river is 1,800 feet wide and has steep banks of granite. The dam is designed to control the Nile water for the expansion of cultivation and for the generation of hydroelectric power and to provide protection downstream for both crops and population against unusually high floods. The work began in 1959 and was completed in 1970. The Aswan High Dam is 12,562 feet long at crest level and 3,280 feet wide at the base, with a height of 364 feet above the riverbed. It has a hydroelectric plant with an installed capacity of 2,100 megawatts. Lake Nasser stretches some 310 miles upstream from the dam site, extending 125 miles into Sudan.
The principal objective behind the construction of the Aswan High Dam is to store sufficient water in the reservoir in order to protect Egypt from the dangers of a series of years when the Nile flood is above or below the long-term average and thus to guarantee a steady flow of water from the Nile for both Egypt and Sudan. An agreement concluded in 1959 between the two countries sets a maximum amount that can be drawn per year and apportions it in a ratio of three to one, with Egypt receiving the larger share. The quantities of water maintained and apportioned are based on the estimated worst possible sequence of flood and drought events over a period of 100 years; and generally, one-fourth of the total capacity of Lake Nasser is reserved as relief storage for the highest anticipated flood during such a period (called “century storage”).
The Aswan High Dam was a source of considerable controversy during its construction, and since it began operation it has continued to have its critics. Opponents have charged that silt-free water flowing below the dam has caused erosion of the downstream barrages and bridge foundations; that the loss of silt downstream has caused coastal erosion in the delta; that the overall reduction in the flow of the Nile resulting from the construction of the dam has caused the inundation of the lower reaches of the river by saltwater from the Mediterranean Sea, with resulting deposition of salt in the delta soils; and that the creation of Lake Nasser has caused the water table along the river to rise, resulting in waterlogging and an increase in soil salinity in some areas. Already the fish population offshore of the delta has been reduced dramatically by the loss of the nutrient-laden silt. Proponents of the dam have maintained that these harmful effects are worth the security of dependable water and power supplies, and, indeed, Egypt would have suffered a severe water shortage in 1984–88 without the dam.
In Sudan the Sennar Dam on the Blue Nile provides water for the Al-Jazīrah plain at the time of year when the water level of the Blue Nile is low. It also produces hydroelectric power. Another dam, at Jabal al-Awliyāʾ on the White Nile, was completed in 1937; it was built to increase the water available to Egypt during the period of low water (January to June) and was not intended to provide irrigation water for Sudan. Other dams—including one on the Atbara at Khashm al-Qirbah (completed in 1964) and the Al-Ruṣayriṣ Dam on the Blue Nile (1966)—have enabled Sudan to take maximum advantage of its allocation of waters from Lake Nasser.
In 2011 Ethiopia began construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) on the Blue Nile River. Located in the western part of the country, near the border with Sudan, the dam was expected to be about 5,840 feet long and 475 feet high. A hydroelectric plant with an installed capacity of 6,000 megawatts was planned. Notably, in 2013 the flow of the Blue Nile was diverted so construction of the dam could proceed in earnest. The dam was the subject of much controversy, in part because of fears that it would negatively impact the water supply farther downstream in Sudan and, especially, in Egypt.
In Uganda, Lake Victoria was made into a reservoir by the completion in 1954 of the Owen Falls Dam (now the Nalubaale Dam); the dam is situated on the Victoria Nile just below the point where the lake waters flow into the river. This permits the storage of surplus water in high-flood years to meet the deficit in years when the waters are low. The fall from the lake is harnessed by a hydroelectric plant that provides power for industries in Uganda and Kenya.
As already mentioned, the Nile River is still a vital waterway for the transportation of people and goods, especially in the flood season when motor transport is not feasible; river steamers still provide the only means of transport facilities in most of the area, especially in South Sudan and Sudan south of latitude 15° N, where motor transport is not usually possible from May to November. Most of the towns in Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan are situated on or near riverbanks.
In Sudan and South Sudan, steamer service on the Nile and its tributaries extends for about 2,400 miles. Until 1962 the only link between the northern and southern parts of Sudan (the present-day countries of Sudan and South Sudan, respectively) was by stern-wheel river steamers of shallow draft. The main service is from Kūstī to Juba. There are also seasonal and subsidiary services on the Dongola reaches of the main Nile, on the Blue Nile, up the Sobat to Gambela in Ethiopia, and up the Al-Ghazāl River in the high-water season. The Blue Nile is navigable only during the high-water season and then only as far as Al-Ruṣayriṣ.
Because of the presence of the cataracts north of Khartoum, the river is navigable in Sudan only in three stretches. The first of these is from the Egyptian border to the south end of Lake Nasser. The second is the stretch between the third and the fourth cataract. The third and most important stretch extends from Khartoum southward to Juba in South Sudan.
In Egypt the Nile is navigable by sailing vessels and shallow-draft river steamers as far south as Aswān; thousands of small boats ply the Nile and delta waterways.
