
# Wikipedia: Giza Plateau
The Giza Plateau (Arabic: هضبة الجيزة) is a limestone plateau in Giza, Egypt, the site of the Fourth Dynasty Giza pyramid complex, which includes the pyramids of Khufu, Khafre and Menkaure, the Great Sphinx, several cemeteries, a workers' village and an industrial complex. It forms the northernmost part of the 160 km2 (62 sq mi) Pyramid Fields in the Western Desert edge of the Nile Valley that are part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site, Memphis and its Necropolis.
The plateau is elevated approximately 60 metres (200 ft) above sea-level.

Geology
The Plateau is composed of the Middle Eocene-aged limestones of the Mokattam Formation, which were used to later construct the pyramids. The plateau's elevation over the surrounding region appears to originate from a major Early Pliocene-aged marine transgression potentially linked to the Zanclean flood, which eroded much of the surrounding rock and formed the steep escarpment. The cliffs of the Giza plateau would have overlooked an expanded Mediterranean Sea around this time.

Pyramid complex and Great Sphinx
Giza pyramid complex
The Giza pyramid complex (مجمع أهرامات الجيزة), also called the Giza necropolis and also known as the Pyramids of Giza or Egypt, is the site on the Giza Plateau in Giza, that includes the Great Pyramid of Giza, the Pyramid of Khafre, and the Pyramid of Menkaure, along with their associated pyramid complexes and the Great Sphinx of Giza. All were built during the Fourth Dynasty of the Old Kingdom of Ancient Egypt, between 2600 and 2500 BC. The site also includes several cemeteries and the remains of a workers' village.
The Giza pyramid complex consists of the Great Pyramid (also known as the Pyramid of Cheops or Khufu and constructed c. 2580 – c. 2560 BC), the somewhat smaller Pyramid of Khafre (or Chephren) a few hundred metres to the south-west, and the relatively modest-sized Pyramid of Menkaure (or Mykerinos) a few hundred metres farther south-west. The Great Sphinx lies on the east side of the complex. Current consensus among Egyptologists is that the head of the Great Sphinx is that of Khafre. Along with these major monuments are a number of smaller satellite edifices, known as "queens" pyramids, causeways pyramid temples, valley temples, harbours, three cemetery fields and a workers' town.

Great Sphinx of Giza
The Great Sphinx of Giza is a limestone statue of a reclining sphinx, a mythical creature with the head of a human, and the body of a lion. Facing directly from west to east, it was carved out of a low lying spur of the Giza Plateau on the west bank of the Nile in Giza. The face of the Sphinx appears to represent the pharaoh Khafre.
The original shape of the Sphinx was cut from the bedrock, and has since been restored with layers of limestone blocks. It measures 73 m (240 ft) long from paw to tail, 20 m (66 ft) high from the base to the top of the head and 19 m (62 ft) wide at its rear haunches. Its nose was broken off between the 3rd and 10th centuries AD.  The Arab historian al-Maqrīzī, writing in the 15th century, attributes the loss of the nose to Muhammad Sa'im al-Dahr.
The Sphinx is the oldest known monumental sculpture in Egypt and one of the most recognisable statues in the world. Archaeological evidence suggests that it was created by ancient Egyptians of the Old Kingdom during the reign of Khafre (c. 2558–2532 BC).

Modern history
Modern Giza is accessed by two main roads. The road from the north leads to Khufu's pyramid; the other to  near the Sphinx's front court, from the east. They cross the Nile River from the east bank and follow the causeway westward. Dominating the plateau and running in a southwest diagonal through the site are the three pyramids of the pharaohs Khufu, Khafre, and Menkaure.

Survey
The Giza Plateau Mapping Project (GPMP) was undertaken in 1984, "an effort to better understand the social and economic forces that supported pyramid construction."
Mark Lehner and his team produced an accurate map of the natural and cultural features of the entire Giza Plateau. Survey data suggested to Lehner possible locations for the city of the pyramid builders, so in 1988 the mission of the GPMP was extended to excavate and survey those areas.

References
External links
Topographic Map of the Giza Plateau
# Britannica:
The Giza Plateau is a rocky plateau on the west bank of the Nile River near
Al-Jīzah (Giza) in northern Egypt. The ancient ruins of the Memphis area,
including the Pyramids of Giza, Ṣaqqārah, Dahshūr, Abū Ruwaysh, and Abū Ṣīr,
were collectively designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979.

### Pyramids of Giza

The three 4th-dynasty pyramids (c. 2575–c. 2465 BCE) of Khufu, Khafre, and
Menkaure were erected on the Giza Plateau. The northernmost and oldest
pyramid, called the Great Pyramid, was built for Khufu (Cheops), the second
king of the 4th dynasty. The middle pyramid was built for Khafre (Chephren),
the fourth king of the 4th dynasty, and the southernmost and last pyramid was
built for Menkaure (Mykerinus), the fifth king of the 4th dynasty.

Khufu’s pyramid is perhaps the most colossal single building ever erected.
Approximately 2.3 million blocks of stone were cut, transported, and assembled
to create the 5.75-million-ton structure. The question of how the pyramids
were built has not received a wholly satisfactory answer, but the most
plausible explanation is that the Egyptians employed a sloping and encircling
embankment of brick, earth, and sand, which was increased in height and in
length as



## Britannica: Pyramids of Giza | History, Location, Age, Interior, & Facts | Britannica
Pyramids of Giza,  three 4th-dynasty (c. 2575–c. 2465 bce) pyramids erected on a rocky plateau on the west bank of the Nile River near Al-Jīzah (Giza) in northern Egypt. In ancient times they were included among the Seven Wonders of the World. The ancient ruins of the Memphis area, including the Pyramids of Giza, Ṣaqqārah, Dahshūr, Abū Ruwaysh, and Abū Ṣīr, were collectively designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979.
The designations of the pyramids—Khufu, Khafre, and Menkaure—correspond to the kings for whom they were built. The northernmost and oldest pyramid of the group was built for Khufu (Greek: Cheops), the second king of the 4th dynasty. Called the Great Pyramid, it is the largest of the three, the length of each side at the base averaging 755.75 feet (230 meters) and its original height being 481.4 feet (147 meters). The middle pyramid was built for Khafre (Greek: Chephren), the fourth of the eight kings of the 4th dynasty; the structure measures 707.75 feet (216 meters) on each side and was originally 471 feet (143 meters) high. The southernmost and last pyramid to be built was that of Menkaure (Greek: Mykerinus), the fifth king of the 4th dynasty; each side measures 356.5 feet (109 meters), and the structure’s completed height was 218 feet (66 meters). All three pyramids were plundered both internally and externally in ancient and medieval times. Thus, the grave goods originally deposited in the burial chambers are missing, and the pyramids no longer reach their original heights because they have been almost entirely stripped of their outer casings of smooth white limestone; the Great Pyramid, for example, is now only 451.4 feet (138 meters) high. That of Khafre retains the outer limestone casing only at its topmost portion. Constructed near each pyramid was a mortuary temple, which was linked via a sloping causeway to a valley temple on the edge of the Nile floodplain. Also nearby were subsidiary pyramids used for the burials of other members of the royal family.
Khufu’s pyramid is perhaps the most colossal single building ever erected on the planet. Its sides rise at an angle of 51°52′ and are accurately oriented to the four cardinal points of the compass. The Great Pyramid’s core is made of yellowish limestone blocks, the outer casing (now almost completely gone) and the inner passages are of finer light-colored limestone, and the interior burial chamber is built of huge blocks of granite. Approximately 2.3 million blocks of stone were cut, transported, and assembled to create the 5.75-million-ton structure, which is a masterpiece of technical skill and engineering ability. The internal walls as well as those few outer-casing stones that still remain in place show finer joints than any other masonry constructed in ancient Egypt.
The entrance to the Great Pyramid is on the north side, about 59 feet (18 meters) above ground level. A sloping corridor descends from it through the pyramid’s interior masonry, penetrates the rocky soil on which the structure rests, and ends in an unfinished underground chamber. From the descending corridor branches an ascending passageway that leads to a room known as the Queen’s Chamber and to a great slanting gallery that is 151 feet (46 meters) long. At the upper end of this gallery, a long and narrow passage gives access to the burial room proper, usually termed the King’s Chamber. This room is entirely lined and roofed with granite. From the chamber two narrow shafts run obliquely through the masonry to the exterior of the pyramid; it is not known whether they were designed for a religious purpose or were meant for ventilation. Above the King’s Chamber are five compartments separated by massive horizontal granite slabs; the likely purpose of these slabs was to shield the ceiling of the burial chamber by diverting the immense thrust exerted by the overlying masses of masonry.
The question of how the pyramids were built has not received a wholly satisfactory answer. The most plausible one is that the Egyptians employed a sloping and encircling embankment of brick, earth, and sand, which was increased in height and in length as the pyramid rose; stone blocks were hauled up the ramp by means of sledges, rollers, and levers. According to the ancient Greek historian Herodotus, the Great Pyramid took 20 years to construct and demanded the labor of 100,000 men. This figure is believable given the assumption that these men, who were agricultural laborers, worked on the pyramids only (or primarily) while there was little work to be done in the fields—i.e., when the Nile River was in flood. By the late 20th century, however, archaeologists found evidence that a more limited workforce may have occupied the site on a permanent rather than a seasonal basis. It was suggested that as few as 20,000 workers, with accompanying support personnel (bakers, physicians, priests, etc.), would have been adequate for the task.
To the south of the Great Pyramid near Khafre’s valley temple lies the Great Sphinx. Carved out of limestone, the Sphinx has the facial features of a man but the body of a recumbent lion; it is approximately 240 feet (73 meters) long and 66 feet (20 meters) high. (See sphinx.)
In 1925 a pit tomb containing the transferred burial equipment of Khufu’s mother, Queen Hetepheres, was discovered near the upper end of the causeway of Khufu. At the bottom of a deep stone-filled shaft was found the queen’s empty sarcophagus, surrounded by furniture and articles of jewelry attesting to the high artistic ability and technical perfection of the 4th-dynasty craftsmen.
Surrounding the three pyramids are extensive fields of flat-topped funerary structures called mastabas; arranged in a grid pattern, the mastabas were used for the burials of relatives or officials of the kings. Besides the core mastabas of the 4th dynasty, numerous mastabas from the 5th and 6th dynasties (c. 2465–c. 2150 bce) have been found around and among the earlier structures.
In the late 1980s and ’90s, excavations in the environs of the pyramids revealed laborers’ districts that included bakeries, storage areas, workshops, and the small tombs of workers and artisans. Mud sealings seem to date the workshop areas to the late 4th dynasty. The tombs range from simple mud-brick domes to more-elaborate stone monuments. Statuettes were found within some of the structures; hieroglyphic inscriptions on tomb walls occasionally identify the deceased.

## Britannica: Great Pyramid of Giza | Egypt, Height, Location, Pictures, & Facts | Britannica
Great Pyramid of Giza,  ancient Egyptian pyramid that is the largest of the three Pyramids of Giza, located on a rocky plateau on the west bank of the Nile River in northern Egypt. It was built by Khufu (Cheops), the second king of Egypt’s 4th dynasty (c. 2543–c. 2436 bce), and was completed in the early 25th century bce. The Pyramids of Giza are often collectively considered one of the Seven Wonders of the World, and they are the last of the wonders still standing.
The Great Pyramid is one of the largest buildings ever constructed. It originally stood about 482 feet (147 meters) tall, but erosion and the removal of most of the polished limestone casing stones—which made the structure smooth and caused it to gleam in the sunlight—have lowered the pyramid’s height to 449 feet (137 meters). The base and three sides each measure 755 feet (230 meters) in length. The pyramid’s sides rise at an angle of 51.87° and are accurately oriented to the four cardinal points of the compass. The Great Pyramid’s core is made of yellowish limestone blocks, and the inner passages are of finer light-colored limestone. The interior burial chamber is built of huge blocks of granite. Approximately 2.3 million blocks of stone were cut, transported, and assembled to create the 5.75-million-ton structure, which is a masterpiece of technical skill and engineering ability. The internal walls, as well as those few outer-casing stones that still remain in place, show finer joints than any other masonry constructed in ancient Egypt.
The entrance to the Great Pyramid is on the north side, about 59 feet (18 meters) above ground level. While immense, the pyramid has very little open space inside. A sloping corridor descends from the entrance through the pyramid’s interior masonry, penetrates the rocky soil on which the structure rests, and ends in an unfinished underground chamber. From the descending corridor branches an ascending passageway that leads to a room known as the Queen’s Chamber and to a great slanting passageway known as the Grand Gallery. That tall corbelled passageway is 151 feet (46 meters) long. At the upper end of the Grand Gallery, a long and narrow passage gives access to the burial room proper, usually termed the King’s Chamber. This room is entirely lined and roofed with granite. From the chamber two narrow shafts run obliquely through the masonry to the exterior of the pyramid; it is not known whether they were designed for a religious purpose or if they were meant for ventilation. Above the King’s Chamber are five compartments separated by massive horizontal granite slabs; the likely purpose of these slabs was to shield the ceiling of the burial chamber by diverting the immense thrust exerted by the overlying masses of masonry. The pyramid’s subterranean chambers were never completed.
Questions persist over how the pyramid was built. The most plausible theory is that the Egyptians employed a sloping and encircling embankment of brick, earth, and sand, which was increased in height and in length as the pyramid rose; stone blocks were hauled up the ramp by means of sledges, rollers, and levers. According to the ancient Greek historian Herodotus, the Great Pyramid took 20 years to construct and required the labor of 100,000 men. This figure is believable given the assumption that these men, who were agricultural laborers, worked on the pyramid only (or primarily) while there was little work to be done in the fields—i.e., when the Nile River was in flood. By the late 20th century, however, archaeologists found evidence that a more limited workforce may have occupied the site on a permanent rather than a seasonal basis. It was suggested that as few as 20,000 workers, with accompanying support personnel (bakers, physicians, priests, etc.), would have been adequate for the task.
Formal excavations of the Great Pyramid of Giza began in the 19th century. One of the first notable discoveries occurred in the 1830s, when a British Egyptologist found laborers’ graffiti indicating that the pyramid belonged to Khufu. Later excavations uncovered two boats buried near the Great Pyramid. The king’s remains, however, have never been found. Some believe his body was stolen by looters, who also removed any treasures. Since the early 21st century, 3D scanners and other noninvasive technologies have been used to explore the pyramid, and in 2023 it was announced that a hidden corridor had been discovered.

## Britannica: Great Pyramid of Giza | Egypt, Height, Location, Pictures, & Facts | Britannica
Great Pyramid of Giza,  ancient Egyptian pyramid that is the largest of the three Pyramids of Giza, located on a rocky plateau on the west bank of the Nile River in northern Egypt. It was built by Khufu (Cheops), the second king of Egypt’s 4th dynasty (c. 2543–c. 2436 bce), and was completed in the early 25th century bce. The Pyramids of Giza are often collectively considered one of the Seven Wonders of the World, and they are the last of the wonders still standing.
The Great Pyramid is one of the largest buildings ever constructed. It originally stood about 482 feet (147 meters) tall, but erosion and the removal of most of the polished limestone casing stones—which made the structure smooth and caused it to gleam in the sunlight—have lowered the pyramid’s height to 449 feet (137 meters). The base and three sides each measure 755 feet (230 meters) in length. The pyramid’s sides rise at an angle of 51.87° and are accurately oriented to the four cardinal points of the compass. The Great Pyramid’s core is made of yellowish limestone blocks, and the inner passages are of finer light-colored limestone. The interior burial chamber is built of huge blocks of granite. Approximately 2.3 million blocks of stone were cut, transported, and assembled to create the 5.75-million-ton structure, which is a masterpiece of technical skill and engineering ability. The internal walls, as well as those few outer-casing stones that still remain in place, show finer joints than any other masonry constructed in ancient Egypt.
The entrance to the Great Pyramid is on the north side, about 59 feet (18 meters) above ground level. While immense, the pyramid has very little open space inside. A sloping corridor descends from the entrance through the pyramid’s interior masonry, penetrates the rocky soil on which the structure rests, and ends in an unfinished underground chamber. From the descending corridor branches an ascending passageway that leads to a room known as the Queen’s Chamber and to a great slanting passageway known as the Grand Gallery. That tall corbelled passageway is 151 feet (46 meters) long. At the upper end of the Grand Gallery, a long and narrow passage gives access to the burial room proper, usually termed the King’s Chamber. This room is entirely lined and roofed with granite. From the chamber two narrow shafts run obliquely through the masonry to the exterior of the pyramid; it is not known whether they were designed for a religious purpose or if they were meant for ventilation. Above the King’s Chamber are five compartments separated by massive horizontal granite slabs; the likely purpose of these slabs was to shield the ceiling of the burial chamber by diverting the immense thrust exerted by the overlying masses of masonry. The pyramid’s subterranean chambers were never completed.
Questions persist over how the pyramid was built. The most plausible theory is that the Egyptians employed a sloping and encircling embankment of brick, earth, and sand, which was increased in height and in length as the pyramid rose; stone blocks were hauled up the ramp by means of sledges, rollers, and levers. According to the ancient Greek historian Herodotus, the Great Pyramid took 20 years to construct and required the labor of 100,000 men. This figure is believable given the assumption that these men, who were agricultural laborers, worked on the pyramid only (or primarily) while there was little work to be done in the fields—i.e., when the Nile River was in flood. By the late 20th century, however, archaeologists found evidence that a more limited workforce may have occupied the site on a permanent rather than a seasonal basis. It was suggested that as few as 20,000 workers, with accompanying support personnel (bakers, physicians, priests, etc.), would have been adequate for the task.
Formal excavations of the Great Pyramid of Giza began in the 19th century. One of the first notable discoveries occurred in the 1830s, when a British Egyptologist found laborers’ graffiti indicating that the pyramid belonged to Khufu. Later excavations uncovered two boats buried near the Great Pyramid. The king’s remains, however, have never been found. Some believe his body was stolen by looters, who also removed any treasures. Since the early 21st century, 3D scanners and other noninvasive technologies have been used to explore the pyramid, and in 2023 it was announced that a hidden corridor had been discovered.

## Britannica: Giza | Pyramid, Egypt, History, Map, & Facts | Britannica
Giza,  city, capital of Al-Jīzah muḥāfaẓah (governorate) in Upper Egypt, located on the west bank of the Nile River just south-southwest of Cairo. It is a suburb of the national capital, with a distinctive character enriched by several archaeological and cultural sites.
The district was settled in prehistoric times; Neolithic objects have been found there. Southwest of the city are the three great pyramids of the pharaohs: Khufu (Cheops), Khafre (Chephren), and Menkaure (Mykerinos), all 4th dynasty (c. 2575–c. 2465 bce). Because of their tremendous size and precise construction, they have been visited by travelers for millennia (see Pyramids of Giza). Other monuments include the Sphinx, smaller pyramids, tombs, and temples. In earliest Muslim times, Giza formed a defense line with the island of Roda (Al-Rawḍah) and, later, Cairo, against incursions up the river from the sea. In 643 ce its defenses were completed by ʿAmr ibn al-ʿĀṣ, general of the caliph ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb; they were restorations of earlier Byzantine fortifications. In the time of al-Maʾmūn (reigned 813–833), Giza was linked to Cairo by a bridge of boats and then by successive permanent bridges. Later a chief mosque was added (961), and Giza became the chief town of a kūrah (district) and later of its province. In the last half of the 19th century, the area witnessed considerable growth: a causeway was built to the pyramids for the convenience of the European tourists who were expected in conjunction with the 1869 inauguration of the Suez Canal; a rail terminus serving Upper Egypt was constructed there in the 1860s; and the Cairo Zoo, also located in Giza, was opened in 1891. In the 21st century the Grand Egyptian Museum was constructed to house ancient Egypt’s most well-known artifacts near its historic monuments; the Sphinx International Airport (opened in 2019) allows tourists to bypass crowded Cairo in order to visit Giza.
The city has modern housing, government offices, embassies, research institutes, hotels, parks, a zoo, and a well-known entertainment district. The University of Cairo, founded in 1908, was reestablished in Giza in 1924. The city also has an ophthalmic research institute, the Academy of the Arabic Language, the Higher School of Applied Arts, and offices of the Ministry of Agriculture. Most of Egypt’s motion-picture industry is also concentrated there. Other industries produce cement, iron products, wood products, automobile parts, cotton and polyester textiles, footwear, and beer. A number of bridges now link both banks with Al-Rawḍah and Al-Zamālik islands. The Cairo-Aswān railway has a station in the city. Pop. (2006) 3,021,542; (2020 est.) 4,324,653.
