
# Wikipedia: Aswan Museum
Aswan Museum is a museum in Elephantine, located on the south-eastern side of Aswan, Egypt. It was set up in 1912 by the British Egyptologist Cecil Mallaby Firth. The museum features artifacts from Nubia, which were housed there during the construction of the Aswan Dam. In 1990, a new department was inaugurated. It displayed findings that were discovered on Elephantine island itself, such as utensils, weapons, pottery and mummies.
The museum is situated close to the Ruins of Abu, where excavations are still taking place.

Museum contents
The museum includes many statues of kings and individuals, some mummies of the ram, the symbol of the god "Khnum", various types of pottery, architectural and decorative elements, a number of sarcophagi, tools of daily life, and some funerary paintings. In recent years, the German mission excavating in Elephantine, in cooperation with the Supreme Council of Antiquities, established an annex to the old museum located to the north of it and includes some of the antiquities that the mission found during its excavations that took place for many years on the island.
The museum also includes a garden, caves carved with rock carvings, minarets in the Islamic style, a Nubian house surrounded by a lake, the temple of the goddess Satet, the Temple of haqanaan ayb, and a Nilometer.

Museum development
Between 1991 and 1993, a new annex was added to the Aswan Museum, called the Incs, located on Elften Island, about ten meters to the north of the Aswan Museum. The area of the museum annex is about 220 square meters and has 3 exhibition halls and a glass ceiling topped by a concrete roof and crowned in the central region in a hierarchical form. The German Archaeological Institute on Elephantine Island from 1969 until 1997.
After closing a period since the January 2011 revolution, the Minister of Antiquities decided to reopen the Aswan Museum on Elephantine Island again to foreign tourists, coinciding with the passage of 100 years since the establishment of the museum in 1917, and a major celebration on this occasion.

Gallery

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


== References ==
# Britannica:
I do not have enough information to provide specific details about the Aswan
Museum. However, I can share some related information that may be of interest:

### Elephantine Island

Elephantine Island is located in the Nile opposite Aswan. In ancient times, it
was known as Abu. The island houses a large temple dedicated to Khnum, Sati,
and Anuket, built by pharaohs of the 18th and 19th dynasties. Additionally,
there is an Old and Middle Kingdom shrine to the north. The island also
features rock tombs of Old and Middle Kingdom nobles on the west bank of the
Nile.

### UNESCO Rescue Efforts

The construction of the Aswan High Dam prompted UNESCO to launch a major
initiative to save ancient sites and monuments in Egyptian Nubia that were
threatened by the rising waters of the new dam. This international effort led
to the preservation of numerous temples, including the temples of Ramses II
and Queen Nefertari at Abu Simbel, and other temples that were relocated.

### Egyptology and Archaeological Discoveries

The building of the Aswan Dams in 1902 and 1970 led to international salvage
excavations in Nubia, which provided valuable insights into Egyptian history.



## Britannica: World Heritage site | Criteria, Definition, History, & List | Britannica
World Heritage site,  any of various areas or objects inscribed on the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage List. The sites are designated as having “outstanding universal value” under the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage. This document was adopted by UNESCO in 1972 and formally took effect in 1975 after having been ratified by 20 countries. It provides a framework for international cooperation in preserving and protecting cultural treasures and natural areas throughout the world.
There are three types of sites: cultural, natural, and mixed. Cultural heritage sites include hundreds of historic buildings and town sites, important archaeological sites, and works of monumental sculpture or painting. Natural heritage sites are restricted to those natural areas that (1) furnish outstanding examples of Earth’s record of life or its geologic processes, (2) provide excellent examples of ongoing ecological and biological evolutionary processes, (3) contain natural phenomena that are rare, unique, superlative, or of outstanding beauty, or (4) furnish habitats for rare or endangered animals or plants or are sites of exceptional biodiversity. Mixed heritage sites contain elements of both natural and cultural significance. The ratio of cultural to natural sites on the World Heritage List is roughly 3 to 1. Several new sites are added to the list at the middle of each year (until 2002, sites were added in December).
The primary impetus for the adoption of the World Heritage Convention was the construction of the Aswan High Dam. In 1959 the governments of the United Arab Republic (U.A.R.; now Egypt and Syria) and Sudan turned to UNESCO for help in salvaging the ancient sites and monuments of Egyptian Nubia. The sites were threatened with destruction by the great lake which would build up behind the new dam at Aswān. UNESCO responded with an appeal to the international community for assistance, and the result was the largest archaeological rescue operation in history.
Aerial archaeological surveys were carried out by UNESCO in collaboration with the governments of the U.A.R. and Sudan in 1960. The UNESCO mission in Sudan, while assisting the national expeditions in providing survey data and a photographic laboratory at Wādī Ḥalfā, made ground surveys of the many islands of the Second Cataract and of sections of the east and west banks of the Nile River. In addition, the mission recorded and excavated a considerable number of sites. An Old Kingdom town was discovered at Buhen, providing evidence of a much earlier Egyptian penetration of Kush than was previously believed. The town was preserved and relocated. A chain of Middle Kingdom mud brick fortresses near the Second Cataract received well-merited attention but could not be salvaged, because of the nature of their construction. Expeditions uncovered rich remains of Nubian A Group and C Group people, in the shape of cemeteries and even houses, and much was added to the knowledge of these historically significant cultures. Explorations at Qaṣr Ibrīm yielded a splendid array of bronze vessels, glassware, ornaments, and iron weapons, as well as large numbers of early manuscripts in Old Nubian, Coptic, and Arabic. A spectacular find was made in the great basilica hidden beneath the mound at Faras West (Pachoras) where excavators removed and restored over 100 remarkable frescoes.
While these efforts represented a remarkable international undertaking, the preservation and relocation of the temples of Nubia posed a challenge of a much greater magnitude. UNESCO’s Executive Committee of the International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia undertook a massive fund-raising effort, and so generous was the world’s response that virtually all the significant temples and shrines of Nubia were preserved. The salvaging of the two rock-cut temples, of Ramses II and Queen Nefertari, at Abu Simbel, posed unprecedented problems. The plan—to remove the overlying sandstone, dissect the temples in the interior of the cliff, and reassemble them on a prepared site on the plateau above—was successfully carried out by late 1967. Covering the temples were concrete domes which in turn would be buried under artificial hills that would reproduce as far as possible the landscape of the original setting.
Fifteen other temples were salvaged in Egyptian Nubia, including the large Egypto-Roman temple of Kalabsha, which now stands some 30 miles (50 km) from the place of its foundation. All three 18th-dynasty temples of Sudanese Nubia—Semna East, Semna West, and Buhen—were re-erected on the grounds of the new archaeological museum in Khartoum. The removal of Hatshepsut’s temple at Buhen exposed, for the first time in 3,500 years, the foundations of the original Middle Kingdom temple beneath. A group of Ptolemaic-Roman temples on the island of Philae, downstream of the high dam, were relocated to the nearby island of Agilkia in the 1970s.

## Britannica: Elephantine | Map, History, & Facts | Britannica
Elephantine,  island in the Nile opposite Aswān city in Aswān muḥāfaẓah (governorate), Upper Egypt. Elephantine is the Greek name for pharaonic Abu. There the 18th- and 19th-dynasty pharaohs built a large temple to Khnum, the ram god of the cataract region, to his consort, Sati, and to Anuket, goddess of nearby Sehel. To the north stands the Old and Middle Kingdom shrine. Numerous outstanding rock tombs of the Old and Middle Kingdom nobles of the city are situated high in the cliff on the west bank of the Nile. In the Old Kingdom (c. 2575–c. 2130 bce) Elephantine was known as the “door of the south,” since it was the most southerly city in Egypt and the starting point for Sudanese trade. In the Middle Kingdom (1938–c. 1600? bce) it was an administrative centre for Egyptian-controlled Nubia. During the New Kingdom (1539–1075 bce), the region was part of the province of Nubia, but, from the Saite period (664–525 bce), it again became a frontier fortress. In modern times the island is the site of two Nubian villages.

## Britannica: Egyptology | Ancient History, Archaeology & Culture | Britannica
Egyptology,  the study of pharaonic Egypt, spanning the period c. 4500 bce to ce 641. Egyptology began when the scholars accompanying Napoleon Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt (1798–1801) published Description de l’Égypte (1809–28), which made large quantities of source material about ancient Egypt available to Europeans. For a discussion of the long-standing fascination with ancient Egypt, see Sidebar: Egyptomania.
Written Egyptian documents date to c. 3150 bce, when the first pharaohs developed the hieroglyphic script in Upper Egypt. The documents of these kings, their successors, and their subjects, as well as the archaeological material of their culture, well preserved by Egypt’s arid climate, provide the source material for Egyptological study.
After the Roman conquest (31 bce) the knowledge of pharaonic Egypt was gradually lost as Hellenism infused Egyptian culture. The temples alone preserved pharaonic religion and the hieroglyphic script. Christianity, introduced in the 1st century, slowly eroded this last bastion of pharaonic culture. By c. 250 ce the Greek alphabet, with six added letters from the demotic (cursive hieroglyphic script), replaced the hieroglyphic system. The last known hieroglyphs were carved in 394 at Philae, where the worship of Isis survived until about 570. Some observations about pharaonic Egypt had passed into Greco-Roman civilization through such Classical authors as Herodotus and Strabo. The worship of Isis and Osiris had also spread throughout the Roman Empire, and Manetho, an Egyptian priest, had compiled a list of kings for Ptolemy I that preserved the outline of Egyptian history in Greek. These factors helped keep a dim memory of ancient Egypt alive in Europe.
After the Arab conquest (641) only the Christian Egyptians, the Copts, kept alive the ancient language, written in Greek characters. In Europe the Coptic texts taken from Egypt during the Renaissance awakened interest in the Egyptian language. Athanasius Kircher, a German Jesuit, published a Coptic grammar in 1643, and European travelers to Egypt returned with antiquities and stories of wondrous ruins. The first scholar known to have engaged in scientific work, the 17th-century English astronomer John Greaves, measured the pyramids of Giza.
In 1799 a French engineer found the Rosetta Stone, a trilingual stela with Greek, hieroglyphic, and demotic texts. Knowledge of Coptic permitted the deciphering of the stone’s inscription, a work completed in 1822 by Jean-François Champollion. He and an Italian scholar, Ippolito Rosellini, led a combined expedition to Egypt in 1828 and published their research in Monuments de l’Égypte et Nubie. Karl Richard Lepsius followed with a Prussian expedition (1842–45), and the Englishman Sir John Gardner Wilkinson spent 12 years (1821–33) copying and collecting material in Egypt. Their work made copies of monuments and texts widely available to European scholars. Muḥammad ʿAlī’s government (1805–49) opened Egypt to Europeans and consular agents, and adventurers began to collect antiquities, often in ways that amounted to plunder. From this arose the great European Egyptian museum collections. Auguste Mariette went from the Louvre in 1850 and began excavations at Memphis, where he found the Serapeum. He convinced Saʿīd Pasha, viceroy of Egypt, to found the first Egyptian museum at Būlāq (1858; moved to Cairo, 1903) as well as the Service des Antiquités (1863). Mariette became the first director of this organization, which worked to stop the hitherto uncontrolled digging and collection of antiquities.
The research of Emmanuel de Rougé in France, Samuel Birch in England, and Heinrich Brugsch in Germany established Egyptology as an academic discipline. In 1880 Flinders Petrie brought to Egypt his technique of controlled, scientifically recorded excavation, which revolutionized archaeology; he pushed back the origins of Egyptian culture to 4500 bce. The British Egypt Exploration Fund (later Society), founded in 1882, promoted excavations using Petrie’s principles, and other professional associations of Egyptologists spread these standards. Adolf Erman and Hermann Grapow published in Berlin the Wörterbuch der ägyptischen Sprache, an exhaustive dictionary of hieroglyphic Egyptian. In 1954 Wolja Erichsen published his demotic lexicon, Demotisches Glossar. The Germans Erman, Eduard Meyer, and Kurt Sethe, the English scholars Francis Llewellyn Griffith and Sir Alan H. Gardiner, and the Czech Egyptologist Jaroslav Černý conducted research that shaped the currently accepted outlines of Egyptian history. James Henry Breasted founded the Oriental Institute at the University of Chicago and pioneered American Egyptology with his survey of Egypt and Nubia (1895–96). He started the Epigraphic Survey in 1924 to make accurate copies of the inscriptions on monuments, which are subject to deterioration from exposure to the elements, and to then publish these records. The group’s current project, which began during the 1990–91 season, is a record of the temple of Amon in Madinat Habu.
American museums opened Egyptian collections in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and excavations in Egypt helped enlarge their exhibits. The University of Pennsylvania, the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City), the Museum of Fine Arts (Boston), the Brooklyn Museum, and the Institute of Fine Arts of New York University all have conducted work in Egypt. The discovery of Tutankhamen’s tomb (1922), as well as Pierre Montet’s excavations of the intact royal tombs at Tanis, heightened public awareness of Egyptology.
The worldwide UNESCO-sponsored effort to raise the temples of Nubia and Philae above the waters of Lake Nasser (1960–75) and the Egyptian government-sponsored tours (during 1972 in London and 1976–79 at six U.S. museums) of objects from Tutankhamen’s tomb spurred international interest in Egypt. Researchers working in Nubia gained access to ancient Egyptian sites, especially in the poorly explored Nile River delta. In the 1970s excavation of ancient Avaris and Per Ramessu (city of the biblical Ramses) and Mendes yielded important insights into these ancient cities.
The building of the Aswān dams (1902 and 1970) led to international salvage excavations in Nubia, the results of which shed light on Egyptian history. A salvage operation led to a great find in the waters off Alexandria. In 1994 Jean-Yves Empereur—the archaeologist who founded the Centre for Alexandrian Studies (Centre d’Études Alexandrines)—was called in to study an underwater site before a concrete breakwater was erected over the area. The site, which contained huge masonry blocks, columns, and a statuary (including a colossal statue that is thought to represent Ptolemy II), is believed to hold some remains of the Pharos of Alexandria—the lighthouse that was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.
In 1976 the First International Congress of Egyptology convened in Cairo; reconvening at three-year intervals, it fosters closer contacts among scholars around the world. After 1952 Egyptians themselves became more involved in Egyptology. Regional museums opened at Alexandria, Al-Minyā, Mallawī, Luxor, and Aswān as increasing numbers of tourists visited Egypt.
Still, despite 200 years of excavation and research, many little-explored sites remain in Egypt. This was evidenced in the mid-1990s by a find near Bawiṭ (Al-Bawīṭī), south of Cairo, where archaeologists found one of the largest necropolises (burial places) ever uncovered; burials there dated to the Roman era, about 2,000 years ago. Excavators uncovered some 100 mummies, ranging from the remains of wealthy individuals buried with golden masks to those buried in less costly terra-cotta or plaster; workers dubbed the area “Valley of the Golden Mummies.” Based upon the 100 or so tombs yet to be opened at Bawiṭ, archaeologists expected the necropolis to hold between 5,000 and 10,000 mummies. The site was particularly interesting to scholars concerned with the burial practices of ordinary people during Egypt’s Greco-Roman period. In addition, the tombs had never before been opened, which allowed archaeologists the opportunity to study an undisturbed site.

## Britannica: Ancient Egypt - The king and ideology: administration, art, and writing | Britannica
In cosmogonical terms, Egyptian society consisted of a descending hierarchy of the gods, the king, the blessed dead, and humanity (by which was understood chiefly the Egyptians). Of these groups, only the king was single, and hence he was individually more prominent than any of the others. A text that summarizes the king’s role states that he “is on earth for ever and ever, judging mankind and propitiating the gods, and setting order [maʿat, a central concept] in place of disorder. He gives offerings to the gods and mortuary offerings to the spirits [the blessed dead].” The king was imbued with divine essence, but not in any simple or unqualified sense. His divinity accrued to him from his office and was reaffirmed through rituals, but it was vastly inferior to that of major gods; he was god rather than man by virtue of his potential, which was immeasurably greater than that of any human being. To humanity, he manifested the gods on earth, a conception that was elaborated in a complex web of metaphor and doctrine; less directly, he represented humanity to the gods. The text quoted above also gives great prominence to the dead, who were the object of a cult for the living and who could intervene in human affairs; in many periods the chief visible expenditure and focus of display of nonroyal individuals, as of the king, was on provision for the tomb and the next world. Egyptian kings are commonly called pharaohs, following the usage of the Bible. The term pharaoh, however, is derived from the Egyptian per ʿaa (“great estate”) and dates to the designation of the royal palace as an institution. This term for palace was used increasingly from about 1400 bce as a way of referring to the living king; in earlier times it was rare.
Rules of succession to the kingship are poorly understood. The common conception that the heir to the throne had to marry his predecessor’s oldest daughter has been disproved; kingship did not pass through the female line. The choice of queen seems to have been free; often the queen was a close relative of the king, but she also might be unrelated to him. In the New Kingdom, for which evidence is abundant, each king had a queen with distinctive titles, as well as a number of minor wives.
Sons of the chief queen seem to have been the preferred successors to the throne, but other sons could also become king. In many cases the successor was the eldest (surviving) son, and such a pattern of inheritance agrees with more general Egyptian values, but often he was some other relative or was completely unrelated. New Kingdom texts describe, after the event, how kings were appointed heirs either by their predecessors or by divine oracles, and such may have been the pattern when there was no clear successor. Dissent and conflict are suppressed from public sources. From the Late period (664–332 bce), when sources are more diverse and patterns less rigid, numerous usurpations and interruptions to the succession are known; they probably had many forerunners.
The king’s position changed gradually from that of an absolute monarch at the center of a small ruling group made up mostly of his kin to that of the head of a bureaucratic state—in which his rule was still absolute—based on officeholding and, in theory, on free competition and merit. By the 5th dynasty, fixed institutions had been added to the force of tradition and the regulation of personal contact as brakes on autocracy, but the charismatic and superhuman power of the king remained vital.
The elite of administrative officeholders received their positions and commissions from the king, whose general role as judge over humanity they put into effect. They commemorated their own justice and concern for others, especially their inferiors, and recorded their own exploits and ideal conduct of life in inscriptions for others to see. Thus, the position of the elite was affirmed by reference to the king, to their prestige among their peers, and to their conduct toward their subordinates, justifying to some extent the fact that they—and still more the king—appropriated much of the country’s production.
These attitudes and their potential dissemination through society counterbalanced inequality, but how far they were accepted cannot be known. The core group of wealthy officeholders numbered at most a few hundred, and the administrative class of minor officials and scribes, most of whom could not afford to leave memorials or inscriptions, perhaps 5,000. With their dependents, these two groups formed perhaps 5 percent of the early population. Monuments and inscriptions commemorated no more than one in a thousand people.
According to royal ideology, the king appointed the elite on the basis of merit, and in ancient conditions of high mortality the elite had to be open to recruits from outside. There was, however, also an ideal that a son should succeed his father. In periods of weak central control this principle predominated, and in the Late period the whole society became more rigid and stratified.
Writing was a major instrument in the centralization of the Egyptian state and its self-presentation. The two basic types of writing—hieroglyphs, which were used for monuments and display, and the cursive form known as hieratic—were invented at much the same time in late predynastic Egypt (c. 3000 bce). Writing was chiefly used for administration, and until about 2650 bce no continuous texts are preserved; the only extant literary texts written before the early Middle Kingdom (c. 1980 bce) seem to have been lists of important traditional information and possibly medical treatises. The use and potential of writing were restricted both by the rate of literacy, which was probably well below 1 percent, and by expectations of what writing might do. Hieroglyphic writing was publicly identified with Egypt. Perhaps because of this association with a single powerful state, its language, and its culture, Egyptian writing was seldom adapted to write other languages; in this it contrasts with the cuneiform script of the relatively uncentralized, multilingual Mesopotamia. Nonetheless, Egyptian hieroglyphs probably served in the middle of the 2nd millennium bce as the model from which the alphabet, ultimately the most widespread of all writing systems, evolved.
The dominant visible legacy of ancient Egypt is in works of architecture and representational art. Until the Middle Kingdom, most of these were mortuary: royal tomb complexes, including pyramids and mortuary temples, and private tombs. There were also temples dedicated to the cult of the gods throughout the country, but most of these were modest structures. From the beginning of the New Kingdom, temples of the gods became the principal monuments; royal palaces and private houses, which are very little known, were less important. Temples and tombs were ideally executed in stone with relief decoration on their walls and were filled with stone and wooden statuary, inscribed and decorated stelae (freestanding small stone monuments), and, in their inner areas, composite works of art in precious materials. The design of the monuments and their decoration dates in essence to the beginning of the historical period and presents an ideal, sanctified cosmos. Little in it is related to the everyday world, and, except in palaces, works of art may have been rare outside temples and tombs. Decoration may record real historical events, rituals, or the official titles and careers of individuals, but its prime significance is the more general assertion of values, and the information presented must be evaluated for its plausibility and compared with other evidence. Some of the events depicted in relief on royal monuments were certainly iconic rather than historically factual.
The highly distinctive Egyptian method of rendering nature and artistic style was also a creation of early times and can be seen in most works of Egyptian art. In content, these are hierarchically ordered so that the most important figures, the gods and the king, are shown together, while before the New Kingdom gods seldom occur in the same context as humanity. The decoration of a nonroyal tomb characteristically shows the tomb’s owner with his subordinates, who administer his land and present him with its produce. The tomb owner is also typically depicted hunting in the marshes, a favorite pastime of the elite that may additionally symbolize passage into the next world. The king and the gods are absent in nonroyal tombs, and, until the New Kingdom, overtly religious matter is restricted to rare scenes of mortuary rituals and journeys and to textual formulas. Temple reliefs, in which king and gods occur freely, show the king defeating his enemies, hunting, and especially offering to the gods, who in turn confer benefits upon him. Human beings are present at most as minor figures supporting the king. On both royal and nonroyal monuments, an ideal world is represented in which all are beautiful and everything goes well; only minor figures may have physical imperfections.
This artistic presentation of values originated at the same time as writing but before the latter could record continuous texts or complex statements. Some of the earliest continuous texts of the 4th and 5th dynasties show an awareness of an ideal past that the present could only aspire to emulate. A few “biographies” of officials allude to strife, but more-nuanced discussion occurs first in literary texts of the Middle Kingdom. The texts consist of stories, dialogues, lamentations, and especially instructions on how to live a good life, and they supply a rich commentary on the more one-dimensional rhetoric of public inscriptions. Literary works were written in all the main later phases of the Egyptian language—Middle Egyptian; the “classical” form of the Middle and New kingdoms, continuing in copies and inscriptions into Roman times; Late Egyptian, from the 19th dynasty to about 700 bce; and the demotic script from the 4th century bce to the 3rd century ce—but many of the finest and most complex are among the earliest.
Literary works also included treatises on mathematics, astronomy, medicine, and magic, as well as various religious texts and canonical lists that classified the categories of creation (probably the earliest genre, dating back to the beginning of the Old Kingdom, c. 2543 bce, or even a little earlier). Among these texts, little is truly systematic, a notable exception being a medical treatise on wounds. The absence of systematic inquiry contrasts with Egyptian practical expertise in such fields as surveying, which was used both for orienting and planning buildings to remarkably fine tolerances and for the regular division of fields after the annual inundation of the Nile; the Egyptians also had surveyed and established the dimensions of their entire country by the beginning of the Middle Kingdom. These precise tasks required both knowledge of astronomy and highly ingenious techniques, but they apparently were achieved with little theoretical analysis.
Whereas in the earliest periods Egypt seems to have been administered almost as the personal estate of the king, by the central Old Kingdom it had been divided into about 35 nomes, or provinces, each with its own officials. Administration was concentrated at the capital, where most of the central elite lived and died. In the nonmonetary Egyptian economy, its essential functions were the collection, storage, and redistribution of produce; the drafting and organization of manpower for specialized labor, probably including irrigation and flood protection works, and major state projects; and the supervision of legal matters. Administration and law were not fully distinct, and both depended ultimately on the king. The settlement of disputes was in part an administrative task, for which the chief guiding criterion was precedent, while contractual relations were regulated by the use of standard formulas. State and temple both partook in redistribution and held massive reserves of grain; temples were economic as well as religious institutions. In periods of decentralization similar functions were exercised by local grandees. Markets had only a minor role, and craftsmen were employees who normally traded only what they produced in their free time. The wealthiest officials escaped this pattern to some extent by receiving their income in the form of land and maintaining large establishments that included their own specialized workers.
The essential medium of administration was writing, reinforced by personal authority over the nonliterate 99 percent of the population; texts exhorting the young to be scribes emphasize that the scribe commanded while the rest did the work. Most officials (almost all of whom were men) held several offices and accumulated more as they progressed up a complex ranked hierarchy, at the top of which was the vizier, the chief administrator and judge. The vizier reported to the king, who in theory retained certain powers, such as authority to invoke the death penalty, absolutely.
Before the Middle Kingdom, the civil and the military were not sharply distinguished. Military forces consisted of local militias under their own officials and included foreigners, and nonmilitary expeditions to extract minerals from the desert or to transport heavy loads through the country were organized in similar fashion. Until the New Kingdom there was no separate priesthood. Holders of civil office also had priestly titles, and priests had civil titles. Often priesthoods were sinecures: their chief significance was the income they brought. The same was true of the minor civil titles accumulated by high officials. At a lower level, minor priesthoods were held on a rotating basis by “laymen” who served every fourth month in temples. State and temple were so closely interconnected that there was no real tension between them before the late New Kingdom.
For all but the last century of Egyptian prehistory, whose neolithic and later phases are normally termed “predynastic,” evidence is exclusively archaeological; later native sources have only mythical allusions to such remote times. The Dynastic period of native Egyptian rulers is generally divided into 30 dynasties, following the Aegyptiaca of the Greco-Egyptian writer Manetho of Sebennytos (early 3rd century bce), excerpts of which are preserved in the works of later writers. Manetho apparently organized his dynasties by the capital cities from which they ruled, but several of his divisions also reflect political or dynastic changes—that is, changes of the party holding power. He gave the lengths of reign of kings or of entire dynasties and grouped the dynasties into several periods, but, because of textual corruption and a tendency toward inflation, Manetho’s figures cannot be used to reconstruct chronology without supporting evidence and analysis.
Manetho’s prime sources were earlier Egyptian king lists, the organization of which he imitated. The most significant preserved example of a king list is the Turin Papyrus (Turin Canon), a fragmentary document in the Egyptian Museum in Turin, Italy, which originally listed all kings of the 1st through the 17th dynasty, preceded by a mythical dynasty of gods and one of the “spirits, followers of Horus.” Like Manetho’s later work, the Turin document gave reign lengths for individual kings, as well as totals for some dynasties and longer multidynastic periods.
In early periods the kings’ years of reign were not consecutively numbered but were named for salient events, and lists were made of the names. More-extensive details were added to the lists for the 4th and 5th dynasties, when dates were assigned according to biennial cattle censuses numbered through each king’s reign. Fragments of such lists are preserved on the Palermo Stone, an inscribed piece of basalt (at the Regional Museum of Archaeology in Palermo, Italy), and related pieces in the Cairo Museum and University College London; these are probably all parts of a single copy of an original document of the 5th dynasty.
The Egyptians did not date by eras longer than the reign of a single king, so a historical framework must be created from totals of reign lengths, which are then related to astronomical data that may allow whole periods to be fixed precisely. This is done through references to astronomical events and correlations with the three calendars in use in Egyptian antiquity. All dating was by a civil calendar, derived from the lunar calendar, which was introduced in the first half of the 3rd millennium bce. The civil year had 365 days and started in principle when Sirius, or the Dog Star—also known in Greek as Sothis (Ancient Egyptian: Sopdet)—became visible above the horizon after a period of absence, which at that time occurred some weeks before the Nile began to rise for the inundation. Every 4 years the civil year advanced one day in relation to the solar year (with 3651/4 days), and after a cycle of about 1,460 years it would again agree with the solar calendar. Religious ceremonies were organized according to two lunar calendars that had months of 29 or 30 days, with extra, intercalary months every three years or so.
Five mentions of the rising of Sirius (generally known as Sothic dates) are preserved in texts from the 3rd to the 1st millennium, but by themselves these references cannot yield an absolute chronology. Such a chronology can be computed from larger numbers of lunar dates and cross-checked from solutions for the observations of Sirius. Various chronologies are in use, however, differing by up to 40 years for the 2nd millennium bce and by more than a century for the beginning of the 1st dynasty. The chronologies offered in most publications up to 1985 have been thrown into some doubt for the Middle and New kingdoms by a restudy of the evidence for the Sothic and especially the lunar dates. For the 1st millennium, dates in the Third Intermediate period are approximate; a supposed fixed year of 945 bce, based on links with the Bible, turns out to be variable by a number of years. Late period dates (664–332 bce) are almost completely fixed. Before the 12th dynasty, plausible dates for the 11th can be computed backward, but for earlier times dates are approximate. A total of 955 years for the 1st through the 8th dynasty in the Turin Canon has been used to assign a date of about 3100 bce for the beginning of the 1st dynasty, but this requires excessive average reign lengths, and an estimate of 2900 bce is preferable. Radiocarbon and other scientific dating of samples from Egyptian sites have not improved on, or convincingly contested, computed dates. More-recent work on radiocarbon dates from Egypt does, however, yield results encouragingly close to dates computed in the manner described above.
King lists and astronomy give only a chronological framework. A vast range of archaeological and inscriptional sources for Egyptian history survive, but none of them were produced with the interpretation of history in mind. No consistent political history of ancient Egypt can be written. The evidence is very unevenly distributed; there are gaps of many decades; and in the 3rd millennium bce no continuous royal text recording historical events was inscribed. Private biographical inscriptions of all periods from the 5th dynasty (c. 2435–c. 2306 bce) to the Roman conquest (30 bce) record individual involvement in events but are seldom concerned with their general significance. Royal inscriptions from the 12th dynasty (c. 1939–c. 1760 bce) to Ptolemaic times aim to present a king’s actions according to an overall conception of “history,” in which he is the re-creator of the order of the world and the guarantor of its continued stability or its expansion. The goal of his action is to serve not humanity but the gods, while nonroyal individuals may relate their own successes to the king in the first instance and sometimes to the gods. Only in the decentralized intermediate periods did the nonroyal recount internal strife. Kings did not mention dissent in their texts unless it came at the beginning of a reign or a phase of action and was quickly and triumphantly overcome in a reaffirmation of order. Such a schema often dominates the factual content of texts, and it creates a strong bias toward recording foreign affairs, because in official ideology there is no internal dissent after the initial turmoil is over. “History” is as much a ritual as a process of events; as a ritual, its protagonists are royal and divine. Only in the Late period did these conventions weaken significantly. Even then, they were retained in full for temple reliefs, where they kept their vitality into Roman times.
Despite this idealization, the Egyptians were well aware of history, as is clear from their king lists. They divided the past into periods comparable to those used by Egyptologists and evaluated the rulers not only as the founders of epochs but also in terms of their salient exploits or, especially in folklore, their bad qualities. The Demotic Chronicle, a text of the Ptolemaic period, purports to foretell the bad end that would befall numerous Late period kings as divine retribution for their wicked actions.
European interest in ancient Egypt was strong in Roman times and revived in the Renaissance, when the wealth of Egyptian remains in the city of Rome was supplemented by information provided by visitors to Egypt itself. Views of Egypt were dominated by the classical tradition that it was the land of ancient wisdom; this wisdom was thought to inhere in the hieroglyphic script, which was believed to impart profound symbolic ideas, not—as it in fact does—the sounds and words of texts. Between the 15th and 18th centuries, Egypt had a minor but significant position in general views of antiquity, and its monuments gradually became better known through the work of scholars in Europe and travelers in the country itself; the finest publications of the latter were by Richard Pococke, Frederik Ludwig Norden, and Carsten Niebuhr, all of whose works in the 18th century helped to stimulate an Egyptian revival in European art and architecture. Coptic, the Christian successor of the ancient Egyptian language, was studied from the 17th century, notably by Athanasius Kircher, for its potential to provide the key to Egyptian.
Napoleon I’s expedition to and short-lived conquest of Egypt in 1798 was the culmination of 18th-century interest in the East. The expedition was accompanied by a team of scholars who recorded the ancient and contemporary country, issuing in 1809–28 the Description de l’Égypte, the most comprehensive study to be made before the decipherment of the hieroglyphic script. The renowned Rosetta Stone, which bears a decree of Ptolemy V Epiphanes in hieroglyphs, demotic script, and Greek alphabetic characters, was discovered during the expedition; it was ceded to the British after the French capitulation in Egypt and became the property of the British Museum in London. This document greatly assisted the decipherment, accomplished by Jean-François Champollion in 1822.
The Egyptian language revealed by the decipherment and decades of subsequent study is a member of the Afro-Asiatic (formerly Hamito-Semitic) language family. Egyptian is closest to the family’s Semitic branch but is distinctive in many respects. During several millennia it changed greatly. The script does not write vowels, and because Greek forms for royal names were known from Manetho long before the Egyptian forms became available, those used to this day are a mixture of Greek and Egyptian.
In the first half of the 19th century, vast numbers of antiquities were exported from Egypt, forming the nucleus of collections in many major museums. These were removed rather than excavated, inflicting, together with the economic development of the country, colossal damage on ancient sites. At the same time, many travelers and scholars visited the country and recorded the monuments. The most important, and remarkably accurate, record was produced by the Prussian expedition led by Karl Richard Lepsius, in 1842–45, which explored sites as far south as the central Sudan.
In the mid-19th century, Egyptology developed as a subject in France and in Prussia. The Antiquities Service and a museum of Egyptian antiquities were established in Egypt by the French Egyptologist Auguste Mariette, a great excavator who attempted to preserve sites from destruction, and the Prussian Heinrich Brugsch, who made great progress in the interpretation of texts of many periods and published the first major Egyptian dictionary. In 1880 Flinders (later Sir Flinders) Petrie began more than 40 years of methodical excavation, which created an archaeological framework for all the chief periods of Egyptian culture except for remote prehistory. Petrie was the initiator of much in archaeological method, but he was later surpassed by George Andrew Reisner, who excavated for American institutions from 1899 to 1937. The greatest late 19th-century Egyptologist was Adolf Erman of Berlin, who put the understanding of the Egyptian language on a sound basis and wrote general works that for the first time organized what was known about the earlier periods.
Complete facsimile copies of Egyptian monuments have been published since the 1890s, providing a separate record that becomes more vital as the originals decay. The pioneer of this scientific epigraphy was James Henry Breasted of the Oriental Institute (now the Institute for the Study of Ancient Cultures) of the University of Chicago, who began his work in 1905 and shortly thereafter was joined by others. Many scholars are now engaged in epigraphy.
In the first half of the 20th century, some outstanding archaeological discoveries were made: Howard Carter uncovered the tomb of Tutankhamun in 1922; Pierre Montet found the tombs of 21st–22nd dynasty kings at Tanis in 1939–44; and W.B. Emery and L.P. Kirwan found tombs of the Ballānah culture (the 4th through the 6th century ce) in Nubia in 1931–34. The last of these was part of the second survey of Lower Nubia in 1929–34, which preceded the second raising of the Aswan Dam. This was followed in the late 1950s and ’60s by an international campaign to excavate and record sites in Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia before the completion of the Aswan High Dam in 1970. Lower Nubia is now one of the most thoroughly explored archaeological regions of the world. Most of its many temples have been moved, either to higher ground nearby, as happened to Abu Simbel and Philae, or to quite different places, including various foreign museums. The campaign also had the welcome consequence of introducing a wide range of archaeological expertise to Egypt, so that standards of excavation and recording in the country have risen greatly.
Excavation and survey of great importance have continued in many places. For example, at Ṣaqqārah, part of the necropolis of the ancient city of Memphis, new areas of the Sarapeum have been uncovered with rich finds, and a major New Kingdom necropolis is being thoroughly explored. The site of ancient Memphis itself has been systematically surveyed; its position in relation to the ancient course of the Nile has been established; and urban occupation areas have been studied in detail for the first time.
Egyptology is, however, a primarily interpretive subject. There have been outstanding contributions—for example in art, for which Heinrich Schäfer established the principles of the rendering of nature, and in language. New light has been cast on texts, the majority of which are written in a simple meter that can serve as the basis of sophisticated literary works. The physical environment, social structure, kingship, and religion are other fields in which great advances have been made, while the reconstruction of the outline of history is constantly being improved in detail.
