
# Wikipedia: Temple of Seti I (Abydos)
The Temple of Seti I is now known as the Great Temple of Abydos. In antiquity, the temple was known as "Menmaatre Happy in Abydos," and is a significant historical site in Abydos. Abydos is a significant location with its connection to kingship due to being the burial site of the proto-kings from the Pre-Dynastic period, First Dynasty kings, and the location of the Cult of Osiris.
Initially, construction started in the 13th century BC by the 19th Dynasty Pharaoh Seti I, also known as Sethos, but was not completed by the time of his death instead, construction was renovated by his son Ramesses II. The temple was built in order to commemorate and worship the earlier pharaohs of Egypt as well as the major gods of the Egyptian pantheon. Ramesses renovated the temple by changing its original design and placing inscriptions within the temple. At the Temple of Ramesses II at Abydos Ramesses states that "son arose in his father place, none of them restored the monument of him who begot him."
The Temple of Seti I was designed with a standard layout from the Ramesside period featuring a "L" shaped design constructed of limestone and sandstone possibly brought from Gebel Silsila. The temple boast many features, including the first and second courts that house hypostyle halls, chapels to Seti I and various gods, and the Osireion. The South wing houses the Gallery of the Kings, which leads to a slaughter court and four secondary rooms, which continues into the Corridor of Bulls with a stairway that exits into storage rooms, and the Hall of Barques.
The temple is also notable for the Abydos graffiti which is ancient Phoenician and Aramaic graffiti found on the temple walls. The Temple additionally contains graffito from the 21st dynasty till the Roman period then from Later periods ranging from Aramaic, Phoenician, Carian, Greek and Cypriot.

Research
In 1863 the, temple was cleared and reconstructed by Auguste Mariette. In 1901-1902, Flinders Petrie, his wife Hilda Petrie, and Margaret A. Murray further excavated the Temple and discovered the Osireion. After World War I, the temple was studied by Henri Édouard Naville and then by Henri Frankfort. During the 1925-1927 season under the Egyptian Exploration Society and Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, Herbert Felton recorded the sculptures within the temple through photography. Amice M. Calverley then detailed the temple walls under Aylward M. Blackman. With financial assistance from John D. Rockefeller Jr., this expedition gained the services of Myrtle F. Broome, Hugh Calverley, C. M. Beazley, Charles Little, Linda Holey, and Adriaan de Buck. This work was completed in 1933 consisting of a four-volume work titled The Temple of King Sethos I At Abydos consisting of photos and drawings of the chapels of Osiris, Isis, Horus, Amen-Re, Re-Harakhti, Ptah-Sokar, and Seti, The Osiris Complex, and the Second Hypostyle Hall. John Baines worked the site in 1979 and again from 1981-1983.

History of temple use
The Temple of Seti did not serve as a mortuary temple to carry the Pharaoh cult; instead, it was created to be a part of the Osiris festival. Possibly being used as the final destination on a processional route connected to the Osiris Temple. Following the temple's passing, the temple was reused several times as Ian Rutherford's study has revealed that the temple was in use after the discovery of Greek, Cypriot, Phoenician, and Aramaic inscriptions make references to the Cult of Osiris. During the Late Hellenistic and Early Roman period, graffiti was left that related the temple to the god Serapis, who served as the state god of Egypt during the Ptolemaic Period. Its final use came from the Late Roman Period, being used as an ocular incubation for the god Bes. Individuals who wished to obtain something from the god would possibly leave offerings, talk to the oracle, and sometimes sleep overnight in the temple to have a mystical experience. This is why tons of Coptic, Greek, and Latin graffiti are found within and throughout the temple.

Features
First and second courts
The temple contains two courts, the first court of the temple is entered through a pylon entrance that portrays Isis, Osiris, Ramesses, and Menereptah. The first court contains inscriptions of Ramesses' battle scenes and scenes of Seti. The Second Court contains scenes of Ramesses interacting with gods. The scenes were used to commemorate Ramesses II's achievements and acceptance as ruler.

First and second hypostyle halls
A hypostyle hall is a large room consisting of many columns to support a roof; the temple's two hypostyle halls may have been the first portion of the temple constructed. Both halls contain columns and reliefs.  In the first hall, twelve columns and reliefs were carved by Ramesses II. The first and second hall are divided by a wall and consist of 36 columns.

Abydos King List
In The Gallery of Ancestors, also referred to as The Gallery of the List, one can find the Abydos King List. This list is depicted in low relief, carved under the reign of Ramesses II, and it shows Seti and Ramesses making offerings to their royal ancestors. These royal ancestors are the past kings of Egypt. Notably, some rulers, like the 15th Dynasty Hyksos that ruled Egypt during the Second Intermediate Period 1650-1550 BCE and the reign of the 18th Dynasty heretic Akhenaten of the New Kingdom 1550-1069, were omitted from the list, possibly due to being associated with periods of internal weakness and divisions. The Gallery of Ancestors led into the storerooms, desert behind the temple, and the slaughterhouse.

Slaughterhouse
The slaughterhouse would have been used to offer offerings to the temple's gods. The slaughterhouse provided access to the desert through its eastern entrance and was connected to the temple through The Gallery of Ancestors to its north. Consisting of a slaughter court, hall, and three rooms, each consisting of depictions of offerings. The court contained depictions of Seti offering meats to the gods, such as the scenes with Osiris, Isis, Horus, and Wepwawet. The Hall contained scenes of animal butchery with priests carrying off the offerings to be used in processions. The Gallery of Ancestors contains scenes that continue these ritual offerings with the king purifying the meat.

Chapels
The temple contains six barque chapels, completed by Seti I's death, in a row dedicated to the gods Osiris, Isis, Horus, Amen-Rem Re-Harakti, and Ptah. Additionally, there is one more chapel belonging to Seti, which is meant to represent Seti as a god. The first three chapels, dedicated to that of Osiris, Isis, and Horus, are intended to represent the principal gods of Egypt's religion and the triad of Abydos. The following three gods are the principal gods of the country, representing their cities, with Amen-Re representing Thebes, Re-Harakti representing Heliopolis, and Ptah representing Memphis. The chapels originally had alleys that lead to seven exits at the front of the temples which would have served as used to move barques for processions, until the exits were filled in by Ramesses II.

Osiris Fetish
The south wall of the Osiris Chapel features an image known as the Osiris Fetish which establishes a connection between solar imagery and the god Osiris. However, this is not the only depiction of the fetish as similar images can be found in the temple of Ramesses II and the Chaple of Ramesses I. The fetish contains imagery that is associated with the sun, as there are representations of lions possibly related to the god Aker, symbolizing the horizons, sunrise, and sunset. Within the image, there is a traditional henu gesture being performed which signifies obedience and submission to a god, as well as symbolically used during rituals to animate the king's soul. The imagery of the sun countries as next to the fetish depiction of rams adorned with the solar headdress, possibly representing the sun crossing into the underworld as the god Mendes. The fetish may have been exposed to the public when the barque was carried by priests during a procession alongside a “corn” mummy used to represent Osiris, as the wall opposite of the fetish depicts which underscores Osiris' role in regeneration.

Osireion
The Osireion is the symbolic tomb of Osiris, created of red granite and sandstone that housed a sarcophagus and a chest for canopic jars. This sarcophagus was possibly surrounded with floodwater in order to grown barley that would have ritually been used for symbolic resurrection of Osiris allowing the Osireion to serve as a center for the cult of Osiris.
Unfortunately, parts of the Osireion now have water due to the Aswan dam raising water. The Osireion, meaning "Menmaatre beneficial to Osiris" or sometimes called the Osiris Complex, is located behind the temple chapels in the shape of a rectangle being 57m by 13m, consisting of eight rooms. The Osireion is linked via transverse access from the Osiris chapel leading to a staircase that descended into a symbolic tomb of the God Osiris.  Inside this tomb, Osiris's Cenotaph was located. The Cenotaph was crafted in an 18th Dynasty tomb design mimicking those of the Valley of the Kings.  While the entrance to the Osierion was through the Osiris Chapel, there was an additional entrance that went beyond the temple's enclosure walls. These entrances were adorned with religious texts such as the Book of the Dead and the Book of Caves, which the tunnel filled with scenes of the afterlife completed by Seti's grandson Merenptah.

Economy
Temple economy
Within Ancient Egypt, major temples were considered the reserve banks of their times that would hold excessive amounts of grains, with granaries possibly delivering goods of bread and beer to temples. Temples consisted of priesthoods and required funding to ensure proper production and operations. One type of textual evidence from the Middle Kingdom that attests to the payment of temple staff is that P. Berlin 10005 = P. Cairo JE 71580. During the New Kingdom, temples played a crucial role in the agricultural production and organization of the state, functioning as powerful economic institutions that oversaw agriculture.
The temple was granted special permission to mine which allowed for economic assets to be acquired within areas such as the Eastern Desert and in Nubia. Within the Eastern Desert the temple would have mined specifically at Wadi Mia and within Nubia at Nauri. The Kanais Decree of Seti I is associated with Seti's temple at Kanais, which protected the gold mines that supplied the gold for the temple at Abydos. Additionally, The Abydos Decree by Seti I at Nauri, carved into the Cliff of Nauri, protects the temple's assets.  This decree declares that the temple's property, the gold mines, boats, goods, and workers, belonged to the temple and was then protected. Ensuring that its resources were unable to be seized by magistrates and fortresses and that the workers were unable to be conscripted for labor or have their animals taken, with a punishment of beatings for those that disobeyed the decree.
The temple also facilitated its trade through its ships, with the temple staff serving as traders who exchanged goods for items such as sesame oil. Furthermore, the temple would have supplied the necessary resources for laborers to tend livestock and supply commodes of cloth and papyri. Although the temple supported workshops and gangs to turn agricultural goods into commodities, its ships ensured economic activities as they were protected.

Temple and its occult
Dorothy Louise Eady
Dorothy Louise Eady, also known as Omm Sety (16 January 1904 – 21 April 1981), was the keeper of the Temple of Seti I. Eady had fallen down a flight of stairs at the age of three. Following this fall, she had awakened and believed that she was the reincarnation of a priestess who committed suicide when she was discovered to be the former lover of Seti. In 1956, Eady moved to a small village in Abydos and practiced the Ancient Egyptian religion. Following her retirement, she began to give tours through the Temple of Seti.

Helicopter hieroglyphs
The "helicopter" image results from the carved stone being re-used over time.  The initial carving was made during the reign of Seti I and translates to "He who repulses the nine [enemies of Egypt]."  This carving was later filled in with plaster and re-carved during the reign of Ramesses II with the title "He who protects Egypt and overthrows the foreign countries."  Over time, the plaster has eroded, leaving both inscriptions partially visible and creating a palimpsest-like effect of overlapping hieroglyphs. These hieroglyphs have been the subject of pyramidologists.

References
Bibliography
Abuel-Yazid, Mohamed (2019). "Architecture of the slaughterhouse of the Seti Temple at Abydos". In Regulski, Ilona (ed.). Abydos: the sacred land at the Western horizon. British Museum publications on Egypt and Sudan. Leuven Paris Bristol, CT: Peeters. pp. 7–25. ISBN 978-90-429-3799-4.
Baines, J. (1984). Abydos, Temple of Sethos I: Preliminary Report. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 70(1), 13. doi:10.1177/030751338407000103
Baines, John, and Jaromír Málek. Cultural Atlas of Ancient Egypt. 2nd ed. Cultural Atlas Series. New York: Checkmark Books, 2000. 117
Bard, Kathryn A., and Steven Blake Shubert, eds. 1999. "Abydos, Osiris Temple of Seti I" Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. London: Routledge. 114
Brand, Peter J., and Wolfgang Schenkel. The Monuments of Seti I: Epigraphic, Historical, and Art Historical Analysis. Leiden: Brill, 2000. 161
Calverley, Amice M., Myrtle F. Broome. The Temple of King Sethos I at Abydos: by Alan H. Gardiner. Vol. 1-4. London: Egypt Exploration Society (Archaeological Survey); Chicago: Oriental Institute University of Chicago,1933.
Cott, Jonathan, in collaboration with Hanny El Zeini. The Search for Omm Sety. New York: Doubleday & Company, 1987. ISBN 0-385-23746-4.
David, A. Rosalie. Temple Ritual at Abydos. Revised paperback edition. London: The Egypt Exploration Society, 2018. 11, 17-18
David, A. Rosalie . A guide to religious ritual at Abydos. Egyptology series. Warminster, Wilts., England: Aris & Phillips, 1981. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-85668-060-1.
David Frankfurter. Religion in Roman Egypt: Assimilation and Resistance. Princeton University Press, 2020. doi:10.2307/j.ctv10vm2p9.
Eaton, Katherine J. “The Festivals of Osiris and Sokar in the Month of Khoiak: The Evidence from Nineteenth Dynasty Royal Monuments at Abydos.” Studien Zur Altägyptischen Kultur 35 (2006): 75–101. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25157772.
Eberhard Otto. Ancient Egyptian Art: The Cults of Osiris and Amon. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1967, pp. 45–60.
Edgerton, William F. “The Nauri Decree of Seti I: A Translation and Analysis of the Legal Portion.” Journal of Near Eastern Studies 6, no. 4 (1947): 219–230.
García, Juan Carlos Moreno. “Temples and Agricultural Labour in Egypt, from the Late New Kingdom to the Saite Period.” In Dynamics of Production in the Ancient Near East, edited by Juan Carlos Moreno García. Oxbow Books, 2016.
Ian Rutherford, "Pilgrimage in Greco-Roman Egypt: New Perspectives on Graffiti from the Memnonion at Abydos," in Ancient Perspectives on Egypt, 1st ed., quoted in Jennifer Westerfeld, "Monastic Graffiti in Context: The Temple of Seti I at Abydos," in Writing and Communication in Early Egyptian Monasticism (Leiden: Brill, 2017)
Kemp, Barry. “New Kingdom Egypt: The Mature State.” In Ancient Egypt, 3rd ed., 1:247–293. Routledge, 2018. 254 doi:10.4324/9781351166485-7.
Kemp, Barry. “The Intellectual Foundations of the Early State.” In Ancient Egypt:, 3rd ed., 1: 60. Routledge, 2018. doi:10.4324/9781351166485-3.
Magdy, Heba. "Representation of the King in the Henu Praise on the Egyptian Temples During the Graeco-Roman Period." Journal of Association of Arab Universities for Tourism and Hospitality 21, no. 2 (2021): 98–112. doi:10.21608/jaauth.2021.88762.1217.
Muhs, Brian 2016. The ancient Egyptian economy 3000-30 BCE. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 135
O’Connor, David. “The Temple of Seti I.” In Egypt’s First Pharaohs and the Cult of Osiris, 46-95. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2009.
Verner, Miroslav (June 3, 2013). "Abydos: The Sacred Land". Temple of the World: Sanctuaries, Cults, and Mysteries of Ancient Egypt. American University in Cairo Press. p. 369. [[doi:10.5743/cairo/9789774165634.001.0001]]. ISBN 978-1-61797-543-1.
Verner, Miroslav, and Anna Bryson-Gustová, Temple of the World: Sanctuaries, Cults, and Mysteries of Ancient Egypt (Cairo, 2013; online edn, Cairo Scholarship Online, 18 Sept. 2014), 364-372 doi:10.5743/cairo/9789774165634.001.0001, accessed 24 Sept. 2024.
Westerfeld, Jennifer. "Monastic Graffiti in Context: The Temple of Seti I at Abydos." In Writing and Communication in Early Egyptian Monasticism, 196. Leiden: Brill, 2017.
"The Abydos temple "helicopter". Archived from the original on July 28, 2005.
"Helicopter Hieroglyphs Explained". raincool.blogspot.nl. May 23, 2010.

External links
https://arce.org/temple-seti-i-abydos/
https://arce.org/project/rediscovering-abydos-with-the-world-monuments-fund/
# Britannica:
The Temple of Seti I in Abydos, built by the pharaoh Seti I, is one of the
most beautiful temples. Seti I ruled from about 1290 to 1279 BCE within the
19th dynasty.

### Features of the Temple of Seti I

  * **Unique Plan** Its design includes seven sanctuaries and two broad hypostyle halls.
  * **Sanctuaries** The sanctuaries are dedicated to the pharaoh and the principal gods of Egypt.
  * **Abydos List of Kings** A long gallery displays a relief of Seti and his son Ramses offering to the cartouches of 76 predecessors, known as the Abydos list of kings.
  * **Reliefs** The wall decorations are known for their delicacy and beauty.
  * **Osireion** Located nearby, the Osireion is believed to be Seti's cenotaph, featuring an underground vaulted hall with a central platform, monolithic pillars, and a channel of water.
  * **Another Temple** Ramses II built another temple to Osiris to the north of Seti’s temple, though it is now mostly ruined.

Seti I took care to expand the temple of Osiris. He dedicated his memorial
temple at Abydos to Osiris and six other deities. The temple walls are
decorated with scenes of pharaohs making offerings to gods. Seti’s reign was a
time of prosperity, and he restored monuments defaced during the Amarna
period.



## Britannica: Abydos | Egypt, Map, History, & Facts | Britannica
Abydos,  prominent sacred city and one of the most important archaeological sites of ancient Egypt. The site, located in the low desert west of the Nile River near Al-Balyanā, was a necropolis for the earliest Egyptian royalty and later a pilgrimage centre for the worship of Osiris.
The western desert embayment at Abydos, Umm al-Qaʿāb, has long been known as the royal cemetery of the 1st and 2nd dynasties. Excavations underway since the late-1970s, however, revealed a group of earlier tombs belonging to a series of kings that predate the 1st dynasty and the official unification of Egypt. These tombs have yielded a rich harvest of intact pottery, royal emblems, ivory labels, and the names of several predynastic kings. The inscribed labels also indicate that Egyptian writing had reached an advanced stage earlier than was generally recognized. In addition, several large-scale mud-brick enclosures located near the desert’s edge were identified as funerary sites for the kings of the 1st (c. 2925–c. 2775 bce) and 2nd (c. 2775–c. 2650 bce) dynasties. A series of wooden boats covered by whitewashed mud-brick casings—probably prototypes for the boats buried in pits next to the pyramids of the Old Kingdom (c. 2575–c. 2130 bce)—were discovered alongside one of the enclosures.
The tutelary deity of the necropolis city in the Old Kingdom was the jackal god, called Khenti-Imentiu; in the 5th dynasty (c. 2465–c. 2325 bce), his cult was gradually absorbed by that of the god Osiris, and the city soon became the focal point of the cult of Osiris. Abydos became a place of pilgrimage for pious Egyptians, who desired above all else to be buried as close as possible to the recognized tomb of Osiris, which was located at Abydos. For those who could not afford the expense of being buried there, stelae were set up, inscribed with the dead man’s name and titles and a prayer to the god. Thousands of these stelae have been found in the city’s cemeteries.
The pharaohs, who by this time were being buried near their city of residence rather than at Abydos, encouraged the cult of the deified king at Abydos, and they took special care to embellish and enlarge the temple of Osiris there. Over the centuries the temple of Osiris was successively rebuilt or enlarged by Pepi I, Ahmose I, Thutmose III, Ramses III, and Ahmose II. Some pharaohs of the Middle and New kingdoms had a cenotaph or a mortuary temple at Abydos. The temple of Seti I was one of the most beautiful of all such temples. Its plan is unique, for it has no fewer than seven sanctuaries, approached through two broad hypostyle halls. The sanctuaries are dedicated to the pharaoh and the principal gods of Egypt. In a long gallery leading to other rooms is a relief showing Seti and his son Ramses making offerings to the cartouches of 76 of their dead predecessors, beginning with Menes. This is the so-called Abydos list of kings. The reliefs decorating the walls of this temple are of particular delicacy and beauty. Only 26 feet (8 metres) behind the temple of Seti I is a remarkable structure known as the Osireion, which is thought to be Seti’s cenotaph. This curious monument is an underground vaulted hall containing a central platform with 10 monolithic pillars surrounded by a channel of water. Another temple to Osiris, now much ruined, was built by Ramses II to the north of Seti’s temple.
Around and between the various temples of Abydos is a vast complex of cemeteries used in every period of early Egyptian history, from the prehistoric age to Roman times.

## Britannica: Seti I | Pharaoh, Dynasty 19, & Monuments | Britannica
Seti I (flourished 13th century bce) was an ancient Egyptian king of the 19th dynasty (c. 1292–c. 1191 bce) who reigned from c. 1290 to c. 1279 bce. His father, Ramses I, reigned only two years, and it was Seti who was the real founder of the greatness of the Ramessides.
In the early years of his reign, Seti led his army northward to restore Egyptian prestige, which had been partly lost during the troubled years of the late 18th dynasty. He battled in northern Palestine and Syria and fought at least one battle with the Hittite king Muwatallis; he subsequently concluded a peace treaty that may have established the frontier at Kadesh on the Orontes River between the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon mountains.
Seti did much to promote the prosperity of Egypt. He fortified the frontier, opened mines and quarries, dug wells, and rebuilt temples and shrines that had fallen into decay or had been damaged, and he continued the work begun by his father on the construction of the great hypostyle hall at Karnak, which is one of the most impressive monuments of Egyptian architecture. Another important work is his memorial temple at Abydos, which he dedicated to Osiris and six other deities and decorated with reliefs of great delicacy on which much of the original color remains. Behind this temple is a curious building dedicated to Osiris. Seti’s tomb is the finest in the Valley of the Kings in western Thebes.
Although his son Ramses II is more famous, Seti is thought by many scholars to have been the greatest king of the 19th dynasty.
For a list of ancient Egyptian kings, see list of pharaohs of ancient Egypt. For a list of Egyptian dynasties, see list of dynasties of ancient Egypt.

## Britannica: Thebes - Ancient Egypt, Archaeology, Ruins | Britannica
Four of the main complexes of ruins are discussed in separate articles. (SeeKarnak; Luxor; Valley of the Kings; Valley of the Queens.) Among the other chief sites of Thebes are the royal mortuary temples, the palace of Amenhotep III, and the Tombs of the Nobles.
In the New Kingdom, when the pharaohs hid their tombs in the secret Valley of the Kings (in western Thebes), ostentation had to be concentrated in their mortuary temples, which rivaled each other in size and magnificence. Although they were designed for the performance of rites connected with the mortuary cult of the builder, they were all dedicated to Amon, the supreme god of Thebes, and had the character and essential form of a New Kingdom temple. They were built in a sequence generally corresponding to a topographic arrangement from north to south. Only traces of most of the earlier ones remain. The most important will be mentioned here.
The temple of Hatshepsut (reigned 1472–58 bce) at Dayr al-Baḥrī is the earliest large 18th-dynasty structure to survive and one of the most impressive. There in the bay of cliffs, next to the pyramid-temple of Mentuhotep II, the queen’s architect Senenmut designed (c. 1473) a series of colonnades and courts on three levels. The approach from the valley led through an avenue of sphinxes, and in the forecourt was a garden planted with trees and vines. On either side of the sloping ramp leading to the next level, against the terrace face, was a gallery whose roof was supported on a double row of columns; a similar gallery ran along the westward side of the court on the next level, with side chapels dedicated to Anubis and Hathor. The top terrace contained a hall of columns, with further chapels on either side and a sanctuary dug into the cliff behind. Many of the surviving series of reliefs in the colonnades and chapels are of great beauty and considerable interest: one depicts the transport of two obelisks by barge from Aswān to Karnak, another the divine marriage of Queen Ahmes with the god Amon and the resultant miraculous birth of Hatshepsut herself, and a third the maritime trading expedition sent by the queen to Punt, the land of incense on the Red Sea.
The mortuary temple of Amenhotep III (reigned 1390–53 bce) must have been the largest and most splendid of all the Theban temples. It was, however, almost completely demolished by later pharaohs, and all that is left today are a few foundations, a huge stela 33 feet (10 metres) high, and the two great statues known as the Colossi of Memnon, which once flanked the gateway in front of the temple pylon but now sit like lonely sentinels in the middle of a field. The statues represent Amenhotep III but the name Memnon is of (later) Greek origin; with their crowns the statues were about 70 feet (21 metres) high, each hewn from a single block of stone. The northern one, after cracking in an earthquake, was the “singing Memnon” celebrated in classical times because on certain days, shortly after sunrise, it emitted a curious high note; numerous Roman tourists, including the emperor Hadrian (reigned 117–138 bce) and his wife Sabina, came to Thebes to hear this marvel, but in the reign of the Roman emperor Septimius Severus (193–211) the statue was patched with masonry and never “sang” again.
The temple of Seti I (reigned 1290–79 bce) at Al-Qurnah survives only in part, the forecourt and pylons having disappeared. It was dedicated in part to Ramses I, the father of Seti, and was completed by Seti’s son Ramses II (reigned 1279–13), who figures in the reliefs. The walls are decorated with scenes of purely religious content in which the pharaohs make offerings to various gods or are favoured by them.
The Ramesseum, or mortuary temple of Ramses II the Great, though much ruined, retains some of its ancient grandeur. The wide outer pylon is decorated with vigorous scenes of the king’s wars against the Hittites in Syria, and the inner pylon has episodes from the Battle of Kadesh (1275) and scenes from the festival of the harvest god, Min. Tall figures of the king in the guise of Osiris decorate the pillars of the inner court. In the first court stood a seated colossus of Ramses II; only fragments of it are left, but enough to show that it was of enormous size. It must have been more than 55 feet (17 metres) high and weighed about 1,000 tons. The hypostyle hall beyond the second court is similar in design to that of the Great Temple of Amon at Karnak; beyond were further pillared halls and a sanctuary that has now disappeared. Around the temple, within the high brick enclosure wall, are very extensive remains of vaulted buildings that must have been magazines (storehouses), stables, workshops, and houses belonging to the temple staff. The Greek historian Diodorus Siculus (flourished 1st century bce) described the Ramesseum under the name of “the Tomb of Ozymandias.”
The temple of Ramses III (reigned 1187–56) at Madīnat Habu is the latest and most southerly of the great New Kingdom mortuary temples. The general plan was modeled on that of the Ramesseum: a wide front pylon, outer and inner peristyle courts separated by a second pylon, a large pillared hall and two smaller vestibules, and the sanctuary surrounded by smaller rooms. The hypostyle hall is partly ruined, the pillars having been dismantled to the level of the first or second drums, but the temple is otherwise well preserved. Scenes carved on the walls of the inner halls show the king performing acts of worship before the gods. There are also scenes of battle in which the king in his chariot mows down the Libyans, attacks an Amorite city, and leads Libyans, Asians, and sea raiders as prisoners before Amon and Mut. On the external wall of the temple, a great sea battle between Egyptians and the Peleset (Philistines) and other Sea Peoples is depicted with much lively detail. Another outstanding relief is that on the outer face of the great pylon, which shows the pharaoh hunting wild cattle in a reed-covered, marshy landscape. Adjoining the temple are the remains of a palace. The high gate in the eastern side of the perimeter wall of the temple area is battlemented like a fortress. Within the precinct are other, smaller temples: one dates from the reign during the 15th century bce of Hatshepsut and Thutmose III but was altered and added to in various reigns and during the Ptolemaic and Roman periods. There are also several mortuary chapels, a sacred lake, a well, and remains, as in the Ramesseum, of houses and vaulted magazines built of mud brick.
South of the temple of Madīnat Habu stand the ruins of what must have been one of the finest buildings in western Thebes: the palace of King Amenhotep III and Queen Tiy at Malkata. It is in fact four palaces, one of which was occupied by Tiy. There was also a vast artificial lake, still traceable by a line of mounds to the southeast of Malkata, which may have been a harbour for shipping connected with the Nile.
The limestone foothills that lie parallel to the river and about 3 miles (5 km) away from it are honeycombed for a distance of more than 2 miles (3 km) with the Tombs of the Nobles, mainly of the 18th, 19th, and 20th dynasties. The usual plan of these tombs included a forecourt, a transverse chamber, a long, corridor-like room, and, at the end, a chapel containing statues of the deceased and his family, in the floor of which a shaft or passage ran down to the burial chamber. After the funeral the shaft was filled in, but the chapel and anterooms were kept open and visited by the family of the tomb owner. Near the villages of Dira ʿAbū al-Negaʾ al-Asasif, Al-Khū khah Shaykh ʿAbd al-Qurnah, Dayr al-Madīnah, and Qurnat Muraʾi, several hundred tomb-chapels are still open to view. The walls are decorated with mural paintings, many of them wonderfully fresh and full of vivid interest, depicting the daily occupations of the ancient Egyptians. The dead are shown, in the outer rooms of these tombs, inspecting the workmen on their estates or in their hours of leisure hunting birds in the marshes or game in the desert, listening to music, or playing checkers with their wives. In the infinite variety of these homely scenes, the whole cycle of the farmer’s year, from plowing to harvest, is depicted; sculptors, metalworkers, weavers, and brickmakers ply their trades; and butchers, brewers, and cooks prepare food for the deceased’s table. The treasurer goes on his rounds of inspection, and the vizier receives foreign envoys to the pharaoh’s court. The merry patterns on the roofs derive from those in houses of the period. In the inner chapels fewer secular scenes are found. The funeral ritual is usually depicted: the cortège crossing the Nile, the ceremony of “Opening the Mouth” by the tomb door, the funerary feast; while in the innermost chamber there are representations of the deceased man and his wife in the company of Osiris and other gods undergoing the ordeal of judgment known as the “weighing of the heart” or being given nourishment by the goddess in the sacred sycamore. In the tombs of the late New Kingdom, purely religious scenes predominate.
In ancient Egypt there were other great cities, but none that has left so great a legacy to posterity. The great temples of Thebes with their historical scenes and inscriptions, the tombs with their wealth of illustration of daily life and religious belief, and the countless antiquities that now fill the museums and private collections of the world, are all aspects of that legacy. Few other sites have contributed more to the store of knowledge about early civilizations than that of ancient Thebes.

## Britannica: Ancient Egypt - Aftermath, Amarna, Reunification | Britannica
Akhenaten had six daughters by Nefertiti and possibly a son, perhaps by a secondary wife Kiya. Either Nefertiti or the widow of Tutankhamun called on the Hittite king Suppiluliumas to supply a consort because she could find none in Egypt; a prince was sent, but he was murdered as he reached Egypt. Thus, Egypt never had a diplomatic marriage in which a foreign man was received into the country.
After the brief rule of Smenkhkare (c. 1336–34 bce), possibly a son of Akhenaten, Tutankhaten, a nine-year-old child, succeeded and was married to the much older Ankhesenpaaten, Akhenaten’s third daughter. Around his third regnal year, the king moved his capital to Memphis, abandoned the Aten cult, and changed his and the queen’s names to Tutankhamun and Ankhesenamen. In an inscription recording Tutankhamun’s actions for the gods, the Amarna period is described as one of misery and of the withdrawal of the gods from Egypt. This change, made in the name of the young king, was probably the work of high officials. The most influential were Ay, known by the title God’s Father, who served as vizier and regent (his title indicates a close relationship to the royal family), and the general Horemheb, who functioned as royal deputy and whose tomb at Ṣaqqārah contains remarkable scenes of Asiatic captives being presented to the King.
Just as Akhenaten had adapted and transformed the religious thinking that was current in his time, the reaction to the religion of Amarna was influenced by the rejected doctrine. In the new doctrine, all gods were in essence three: Amon, Re, and Ptah (to whom Seth was later added), and in some ultimate sense they too were one. The earliest evidence of this triad is on a trumpet of Tutankhamun and is related to the naming of the three chief army divisions after these gods; religious life and secular life were not separate. This concentration on a small number of essential deities may possibly be related to the piety of the succeeding Ramesside period, because both viewed the cosmos as being thoroughly permeated with the divine.
Under Tutankhamun a considerable amount of building was accomplished in Thebes. His Luxor colonnade bears detailed reliefs of the traditional beautiful festival of Opet; he decorated another structure (now only a series of disconnected blocks) with warlike scenes. He affirmed his legitimacy by referring back to Amenhotep III, whom he called his father. Tutankhamun’s modern fame comes from the discovery of his rich burial in the Valley of the Kings. His tomb equipment was superior in quality to the fragments known from other royal burials, and the opulent display—of varying aesthetic value—represents Egyptian wealth at the peak of the country’s power.
Tutankhamun’s funeral in about 1323 bce was conducted by his successor, the aged Ay (ruled 1323–20 bce), who in turn was succeeded by Horemheb. The latter probably ruled from c. 1319 to c. 1292 bce, but the length of his poorly attested reign is not certain. Horemheb dismantled many monuments erected by Akhenaten and his successors and used the blocks as fill for huge pylons at Karnak. At Karnak and Luxor he appropriated Tutankhamun’s reliefs by surcharging the latter’s cartouches with his own. Horemheb appointed new officials and priests not from established families but from the army. His policies concentrated on domestic problems. He issued police regulations dealing with the misbehavior of palace officials and personnel, and he reformed the judicial system, reorganizing the courts and selecting new judges.
Horemheb was the first post-Amarna king to be considered legitimate in the 19th dynasty, which looked to him as the founder of an epoch. The reigns of the Amarna pharaohs were eventually to be subsumed into his own, leaving no official record of what posterity deemed to be an unorthodox and distasteful interlude. Having no son, he selected his general and vizier, Ramses, to succeed him.
Ramses I (ruled c. 1292–91 bce) hailed from the eastern Nile River delta, and with the 19th dynasty there was a political shift into the delta. Ramses I was succeeded by his son and coregent, Seti I, who buried his father and provided him with mortuary buildings at Thebes and Abydos.
Seti I (ruled c. 1290–79 bce) was a successful military leader who reasserted authority over Egypt’s weakened empire in the Middle East. The Mitanni state had been dismembered, and the Hittites had become the dominant Asian power. Before tackling them, Seti laid the groundwork for military operations in Syria by fighting farther south against nomads and Palestinian city-states; then, following the strategy of Thutmose III, he secured the coastal cities and gained Kadesh. Although his engagement with the Hittites was successful, Egypt acquired only temporary control of part of the north Syrian plain. A treaty was concluded with the Hittites, who, however, subsequently pushed farther southward and regained Kadesh by the time of Ramses II. Seti I ended a new threat to Egyptian security when he defeated Libyans attempting to enter the delta. He also mounted a southern campaign, probably to the Fifth Cataract region.
Seti I’s reign looked for its model to the mid-18th dynasty and was a time of considerable prosperity. Seti I restored countless monuments that had been defaced in the Amarna period, and the refined decoration of his monuments, particularly his temple at Abydos, shows a classicizing tendency. He also commissioned striking and novel reliefs showing stages of his campaigns, which are preserved notably on the north wall of the great hypostyle hall at Karnak. This diversity of artistic approach is characteristic of the Ramesside period, which was culturally and ethnically pluralistic.

## Britannica: Karnak | Definition, History, Temple, & Map | Britannica
Karnak,  village located in Al-Uqṣur muḥāfaẓah (governorate), Upper Egypt, which has given its name to the northern half of the ruins of Thebes on the east bank of the Nile River, including the ruins of the Great Temple of Amon. Karnak and other areas of ancient Thebes—including Luxor, the Valley of the Kings, and the Valley of the Queens—were collectively designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1979.
Excavations in the 20th century pushed the history of the site back to the Gerzean period (c. 3400–c. 3100 bce), when a small settlement was founded on the wide eastern bank of the Nile floodplain. Karnak contains the northern group of the Theban city temples, called in ancient times Ipet-Isut, “Chosen of Places.” The ruins cover a considerable area and are still impressive, though nothing remains of the houses, palaces, and gardens that must have surrounded the temple precinct in ancient times. The most northerly temple is the Temple of Mont, the war god, of which little now remains but the foundations. The southern temple, which has a horseshoe-shaped sacred lake, was devoted to the goddess Mut, wife of Amon; this also is much ruined. Both temples were built during the reign of Amenhotep III (1390–53), whose architect was commemorated by statues in the Temple of Mut.
Between these two precincts lay the largest temple complex in Egypt, and one of the largest in the world, the great metropolitan temple of the state god, Amon-Re. The complex was added to and altered at many periods and, in consequence, lacks a systematic plan. It has been called a great historical document in stone: in it are reflected the fluctuating fortunes of the Egyptian empire. There are no fewer than 10 pylons, separated by courts and halls and nowadays numbered for convenience, number one being the latest addition. Pylons one through six form the main east-west axis leading toward the Nile. The seventh and eighth pylons were erected in the 15th century bce by Thutmose III and Queen Hatshepsut, respectively, and the ninth and tenth during Horemheb’s reign (1319–1292). These pylons formed a series of processional gateways at right angles to the main axis, linking the temple with that of Mut to the south and, farther, by way of the avenue of sphinxes, with the temple at Luxor 2 miles (3 km) away.
There are few extant traces of the original Middle Kingdom (1938–c. 1630 bce) temple save a small jubilee shrine of Sesostris I (reigned 1908–1875), now reconstructed from fragments found inside the third pylon. At the beginning of the New Kingdom (c. 1539–1075 bce), Thutmose I (reigned 1493–c. 1482) enclosed this 12th-dynasty (1938–c. 1756 bce) temple with a stone wall and fronted it with two pylons (the fourth and fifth), erecting two obelisks in front of the new temple facade. His son, Thutmose II (reigned 1482–79), added a broad festival court in front of the enlarged temple as well as another pair of obelisks. Hatshepsut then inserted a quartzite bark shrine dedicated to Amon in the centre of the temple, as well as two additional pairs of obelisks, one of which still stands. In the reign of Thutmose III (1479–26) the temple was greatly enlarged; not only did he add to the existing structures and add a pylon (the sixth) and pillared courts containing halls in which he inscribed the annals of his campaigns, but he also built to the east of the Middle Kingdom area a transverse temple in the form of a jubilee pavilion. On the walls of one of the rear rooms of this temple is carved a kind of pictorial catalog of the exotic animals and plants he had brought home from Asia in the 25th year of his reign. Other additions were made by his successors. Amenhotep III decided to demolish the festival court, building in its stead the colossal third pylon, filled largely with blocks from the dismantled structures. His son, Akhenaton (reigned 1353–36), built several large open-air temples around the periphery of Karnak in honour of his favoured deity, the Aton, all of which were later torn down following the restoration of the cult of Amon; talatat (small sandstone blocks that had been used in the construction of the Aton temples) were used as construction fill for the second, ninth, and tenth pylons, erected by Horemheb.
The most striking feature of the temple at Karnak is the hypostyle hall, which occupies the space between the third and second pylons. The area of this vast hall, one of the wonders of antiquity, is about 54,000 square feet (5,000 square metres). It was decorated by Seti I (reigned 1290–79) and Ramses II (reigned 1279–13), to whom much of the construction must be due. Twelve enormous columns, nearly 80 feet (24 metres) high, supported the roofing slabs of the central nave above the level of the rest so that light and air could enter through a clerestory. Seven lateral aisles on either side brought the number of pillars to 134. Historical reliefs on the outer walls show the victories of Seti in Palestine and Ramses II defeating the Hittites at the Battle of Kadesh.
Ramses III (reigned 1187–56) built a small temple to Amon outside the Ramesside pylon across from a triple shrine erected by Seti II (reigned 1204–1198). The Bubastite Gate at the southeast corner of this court commemorates the victories won by Sheshonk I (reigned 945–924), the biblical Shishak, in Palestine. The Kushite (Nubian) pharaoh Taharqa (reigned 690–664) erected a tall colonnade, of which one pillar still stands. The smaller monuments were subsequently enclosed by the addition of a vast court, probably begun during the Late Period (664–332 bce), fronted by the massive first pylon, an ambitious project that was never completed. Beyond it an avenue of sphinxes—set in place largely by Amenhotep III and usurped by Ramses II—leads to the quayside.
Within the enclosure of the Great Temple of Amon are included a number of other notable small shrines and temples. A temple to Ptah, in the north side of the enclosure, was built by Hatshepsut and Thutmose III and added to by the Ptolemies, who also embellished the Great Temple of Amon by the addition of granite shrines and gateways. To the south, Ramses III dedicated a temple to Khons, the moon god, which merits attention. A small late temple to Opet, the hippopotamus goddess, adjoins it.
The site of Karnak and other areas of ancient Thebes present a constant problem to the architects who seek to preserve them, for the foundations are inadequate, and moisture from the Nile’s annual flood has disintegrated the sandstone at the base of walls and columns. The work of repairing and strengthening goes on continuously, and, as this work is carried out, new discoveries are constantly being made.
