
# Wikipedia: White Monastery
The Coptic White Monastery (Arabic: الدير أبيض), also The Monastery of Abba Shenouda (Coptic: ⲡⲙⲟⲛⲁⲥⲧⲏⲣⲓⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲁⲡⲁ ϣⲉⲛⲟⲩϯ) and The Athribian Monastery (Coptic: ⲡⲧⲱⲟⲩ ⲛ̀ⲁⲑⲣⲏⲃⲓ, romanized: eptōw enatʰrebi, lit. 'the mountain of Athribis') is a Coptic Orthodox monastery named after Saint Shenoute. It is located near the Upper Egyptian cities of Tahta and Sohag, and about two and a half miles (4.0 km) south-east of the Red Monastery. 
The name of the monastery is derived from the colour of the white limestone of its outside walls. The White Monastery is architecturally similar to the Red Monastery. The monastery had one of the largest Coptic libraries ever known with over 1,000 codices of which 10% survive.

History
Foundation
The monastery was founded by Saint Pigol (Coptic: ⲡⲓϫⲱⲗ), the maternal uncle of Shenoute, in 442[Questionable date: see here]. However, it only became renowned after Shenoute succeeded his uncle as abbot of the monastery. From 30 monks, the population of the White Monastery increased to 2,200 monks and 1800 nuns by Shenoute's death in 466. The monastery also increased in size during this time to 12,800 acres (51.8 km2), an area about 3000 times its original size. Such an area included cells, kitchens, and storehouses, the ruins of which can still be seen to the north, west, and south sides of the church complex.
Following the death of Shenouda, the monastic community of the White Monastery continued strong throughout the 5th century under the leadership of Saint Wissa (Coptic: ⲃⲏⲥⲁ) and later Saint Zenobius. However, the monastery began slowly to decline following the Muslim conquest of Egypt in 641. The state of decline can be attributed in part to the heavy taxes that the monasteries in Egypt had to endure. Such taxes put a great number of monasteries out of existence.

Middle Ages
In the middle of the 8th century, the Arab governor al-Qasim ibn Ubayd Allah forced his way into the monastery church with his female concubine on horseback. This resulted in the concubine falling to the ground and eventually to her death, along with the horse she was riding.
The monastery served as a host for Armenian monks in the 11th and the 12th centuries. This is indicated in the inscriptions found on the paintings of the central apse of the church, which date between 1076 and 1124. Among these Armenian monks was the artist Theodore of Kaysun, the Armenian Vizier Bahram, who became a monk after having been banished from his office during the Caliphate of the Fatimid caliph al-Hafiz (1135-1137). In 1168, the monastery was attacked by Shirkuh.
The monastery underwent major restorations between 1202 and 1259. In the 13th century, in the work attributed to Abu al-Makarim, it is mentioned that the monastery included a keep, which was probably built during the Middle Ages to protect the monastery from the attacks of the desert's bedouins. Abu al-Makarim also tells of an enclosure wall around the monastery within which a garden full of all sorts of trees existed. The lack of literary manuscripts after the 14th century indicates that the monastery was in an advanced state of decline from that time onwards. According to al-Maqrizi, who called it both the "White Monastery" and the "Monastery of St Shenoute", mentioned that in the 13th century, it lay in ruins and only the church remained in use.

Modern history
The monastery was visited by Johann Michael Vansleb in 1672 and by Richard Pococke in 1737. Both of them made an incorrect attribution of the foundation of the monastery to Helena of Constantinople, Emperor Constantine's mother. During the second half of the 18th century, the southwest corner of the surviving church-complex collapsed. In 1798, the monastery was sacked and totally burned down by the Mamluks. The destruction was mentioned by the French traveler Dominique Vivant, who visited the monastery on the day following its destruction. In 1802, under the direction of Muhammad Ali, parts of the monastery were rebuilt. In 1833, Robert Curzon visited the monastery and left a written record of his visit. In 1893, Fergusson published a plan of the church complex. However, the most significant contributions to the study of the monastery and its church were made by such visitors as Wladimir de Bock (1901), C. R. Peers (1904), Flinders Petrie (1907), Somers Clarke (1912), and Ugo Monneret de Villard (1925).
In 1907, the church complex experienced another repair which included the removal of the encrustation of brick work and the undercovering of the doorways. Then in the 1980s more restoration work took place on the walls and the columns of the church.

Description of the monastery
The only surviving piece of the original monastery is its church complex, which was built in the Basilica style. It has six entrances: three centrally placed in the north, south, and west walls. The other three are located south of the west wall, east of the south wall, and east of the north wall. Its outer appearance resembles an Egyptian temple. It has a combination of exo- and eso-narthex leading into the body of the original church. This body, which is now an open courtyard, contains a nave flanked by two aisles. They are separated from the nave by long rows of columns with a returned isle in the west to define the eso-narthex. There existed atop these isles mezzanine galleries, as evidenced by the two rows of windows seen on the walls. The grand style of this 5th-century basilica includes an open courtyard measuring 172 feet by 76 feet, of which the nave occupies half that width.

The current Church now occupies what used to be the choir and the sanctuary areas. This is separated from the open court by a solid red brick wall, of medieval construction, with doors and windows. The original sanctuary was built in a trefoil style with three apses. It is a step higher than the nave in the open court. The rectangular space, defined by the apses to its north, south and east sides, served as the altar for the basilica. Now the altar is located within the central or eastern apse. The rest of the space is now integrated into the nave of the current Church. There is also a new iconostasis made with solid wood and adorned by small icons on its top register. The current sanctuary in the central apse is actually divided into three. The middle one is dedicated to Saint Shenouda the Archimandrite, the southern one to the Mary, mother of Jesus, and the northern one to Saint George.
The original three apses are of magnificent construction. Each contains two registers of columns separated by a decorative frieze and surmounted by architraves. Between the columns there lie the niches. The horizontal cross-section of the niches in each register alternates between rectangular and circular. The semidome of each is decorated with a beautiful design. Above the registers lies the majestic semidome. There paintings can be distinguished in these semidomes. The one in the central apse has a painting of the Christ Pantocrator and the four evangelists. In the northern apse, there is a depiction of the dormition of the Virgin Mary. The southern apse has a representation of the resurrection with the two Mary's and two angels.
The church complex has several annexes along the east and south walls. The most significant is the great hall that runs alongside the south wall. This probably served the function of a women's chamber in the early days. It has a chamber at each of its east and west ends. The west chamber contains a well and it underwent reconstruction in the early 19th century. There are also two chambers south of the central apse and a third one to the north. On the south side, one chamber is rectangular with a font which is now used as a baptistery, and the second is circular with niches. On the north side, the chamber is square. There is another rectangular chamber west of the circular chamber and it is divided in half by two projecting buttresses.

There is a variety of building material employed in the construction of the church complex. This reflects the different stages that the monastery went through since the time of its foundation. The outer walls are of white limestone set in mortar with no bonding. They are sloped six degrees from vertical on the outside (original construction). The gargoyles and the door lintels are also of limestone, with the doorjambs being made of red granite. The source of these limestones is probably from ruins of nearby Ancient Egyptian temples, which Saint Shenouda the Archimandrite contributed to their demise figuratively and literally. The original nave columns are made of marble or granite with few later ones being of red bricks. Many of these columns are no longer standing. The paving of the nave is of limestone or granite slabs.
The original sanctuary is now roofed with vaults of burnt bricks; originally, it had a wood roof. The nave, isles, and the great south hall (lateral narthex) are now without a roof; originally they had wood gabled roofs with galleries atop the isles. The wall between the exo-narthex and the body of the original church is of limestone. The great wall that defines the western boundary of the current church is made up of red bricks which encase the original columns and arches. This now is covered with a cream-color stucco layer. The four arches carrying the squinches of the central, original, sanctuary dome are also made up of red bricks except for the one toward the east which is of marble construction.

The library
The literacy campaign, which Shenouda the Archimandrite waged in his monastery, reflected positively on the library of the monastery. With everyone in the monastery capable of reading and many skilled in writing manuscripts, the library must have been one of the greatest libraries of Christian Egypt. The library contained around 1,000 codices, averaging 200-300 pages each. Around 10% of these survived today in collections primarily located in Europe. This testimony is not only in the number of codices identified but also in the wide variety of subjects it possessed.
Today the library is scattered all over the world. Codices were dismembered with individual folios ending up in different libraries or museums. At times, even an individual folio ended up in different libraries which were thousands of miles apart. Serious effort has been undertaken to artificially regroup these codices from their Diaspora with photographic means. Mgr. Louis Théophile Lefort, a coptologist of Louvain, made the first comprehensive attempt toward achieving this monumental goal. However, his collection was a tragic victim of World War II. Currently, this task has been taken up by Tito Orlandi and his associates in the Sapienza University of Rome. There, they formed the Corpus dei Manoscritti Copti Letterari. They were able to identify hundreds of separate codices with the aid of the prior works that Coptic scholars had previously done.
The library contents, as mentioned above, has adorned many libraries and museums around the world from as early as the 19th century. The following is a partial list of those places that possess such fragments:

Amsterdam, Rijksmuseum Amsterdam
Berlin, Deutsche Staatsbibliothek
Cairo, Coptic Museum
Cairo, Egyptian Museum
Cairo, Institut Français d'Archéologie Orientale
Cambridge, Cambridge University Library
Florence, Laurentian Library
Saint Petersburg, Russian National Library
London, British Library
London, Eton College
Louvain, Bibliothèque de l'Université
Manchester, John Rylands University Library
Michigan, University of Michigan Library
Moscow, Pushkin Museum
Naples, Biblioteca Nazionale Vittorio Emanuele III
New York, The Morgan Library & Museum
Oxford, Bodleian Library
Paris, Bibliothèque nationale de France
Paris, Musée du Louvre
Strasbourg, Bibliothèque de l'Université
Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica
Venice, Biblioteca Naniana
Vienna, Österreichische Nationalbibliothek
The ancient library of the White Monastery is rich in many categories such as biblical, hagiographical, liturgical, etc. This provides the researcher with good knowledge about what the monks were reading and what they were allowed to read at different stages of the monastery's development. However, the early times are not too well represented in the surviving fragments. This can be either attributed to their frequent use or simply that they were victims of time and of the decline of the monastery in later times. The dialect of these manuscripts were predominantly in Sahidic Coptic, which was perfected in its literary form by Saint Shenouda the Archimandrite. There were also some bilingual manuscripts. The early ones were in Sahidic Coptic and Greek, while the later ones had Sahidic Coptic and Arabic. The writing materials employed were mostly parchment, because of its prevalence, but some of the later ones were found on paper.
The first category, and most abundant, is the Biblical manuscripts. Nearly every book of the Old Testament, including the Deuterocanonical Books is represented. The only exception is some of the historical books, which were always in short supply in Egyptian monasteries. The New Testament, on the other hand is represented in its entirety though in a fragmentary shape.
A second category is the apocryphal Gospels, Acts, and Biblical lives that were frequently read in Egyptian monasteries. These include the Gospel of the Twelve, Gospel of Bartholomew, Acts of Thomas, Acts of Pilate, Life of the Virgin Mary, and History of Joseph the Carpenter.
A third category is the historical manuscripts, which are rare in any of the Coptic libraries found thus far. However, in the White Monastery one finds a substantial part of an ecclesiastical history manuscript. That manuscript deals with the history of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria in the 4th and 5th centuries. In addition, there are several fragments of codices that record the acts of the great Councils of Nicaea and Ephesus.
Another important category found in the library is the hagiographic texts. These are found in relative abundance in all monastic libraries, and the White Monastery is no exception. They are primarily intended for the spiritual edification of the monks rather than being accurate historical records of the saints. They include acts and related texts of many martyrs such as Saint Colluthus the Physician, Saints Cosmas and Damian, St. Philopater Mercurius, Saint Psote, Saint Theodore, Saint Victor, and many others. There are also the lives of many important saints of the Egyptian Church like Saint Anthony, Saint Athanasius, Saint Pachomius and his disciples, Saint Samuel the Confessor, and Saint Shenouda the Archimandrite to name just a few.
The richest and most significant category available is the writings of the fathers. This library has yielded a great number of manuscripts, preserving texts of the composition of Egyptian writers, as well as Coptic translation of Greek writings of Church Fathers. The most significant part of it is that of the remarkable works of Saint Shenouda the Archimandrite. Other writings includes those of Saint Wissa's sermons, the writings of Saint Pachomius and his disciples, and the Apophthegmata Patrum. Other texts of original Coptic composition include those of Constantine of Asyut, John of Burulus, and Rufus of Shotep. The group of Coptic translations of Greek writings includes those of Saint Peter of Alexandria, Saint Athanasius, Saint Theophilus, Saint Cyril the Great, and Saint Dioscorus. The Greek translations of non-Coptic Fathers include Saint Cyril of Jerusalem, Saint John Chrysostom, and Saint Severus of Antioch. Works of other authors are also found in that collection.

See also
Saint Shenouda the Archimandrite
Codex Borgianus
Uncial 070

References
Sources
Monneret de Villard, U., "Les Couvents Pres de Sohag". 2 vol. Milan 1925-7
Peers, C. R., "The White Monastery near Sohag Upper Egypt" Archaeological Journal 3,11 (61), 1904, 131-53
Takla, H. N., "St. Shenouda the Archmandrite - His Life and Times". Los Angeles 1987.
Timm, S., "Ad-Der al Abyad" In Das Christlich-Koptische Agypten in Arabischer Zeit. Vol 2 (D-F) pp. 601–38, Wiesbaden, 1984
Blanke, Louise (30 August 2019). An Archaeology of Egyptian Monasticism: Settlement, Economy and Daily Life at the White Monastery Federation. Yale Egyptology. ISBN 978-1-950343-10-2. Retrieved 26 February 2024.
Capuani, Massimo; Meinardus, Otto F. A. (2002). Christian Egypt: Coptic Art and Monuments Through Two Millennia. Liturgical Press. ISBN 978-0-8146-2406-7.
Evetts, B. T. A. (2001-12-31). The Churches and Monasteries of Egypt and Some Neighbouring Countries. Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias Press. doi:10.31826/9781463207656. ISBN 978-1-4632-0765-6.
Gabra, Gawdat; Vivian, Tim (2002). Coptic Monasteries: Egypt's Monastic Art and Architecture. American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 978-977-424-691-3. JSTOR j.ctt15m7g74.
Meinardus, Otto F. A. (2010-10-15). Two Thousand Years of Coptic Christianity. American University in Cairo Press. doi:10.5743/cairo/9789774247576.001.0001. ISBN 978-977-424-757-6.
Images By Dr. Enrique Abreu 2010 : Images of both Red & White monasteries

External links

Alin Suciu's blog on the reconstruction of the White Monastery manuscripts
The monastery of St. Shenouda
The White Monastery
# Britannica:
The White Monastery, located near Atripe in Upper Egypt, was headed by Shenute
(c. 360–450), a monastic reformer and regarded as a saint in the Coptic
Church. Shenute became the abbot of the White Monastery in 383, taking over
from his uncle. He brought back the rules of Pachomius, who had founded
communal monasticism in the 4th century. These rules emphasized manual labor,
prayer, and obedience. Shenute was also the first abbot to ask his monks to
write down their promise to obey the rules.

In 431, Shenute went to the Council of Ephesus and joined in the condemnation
of Nestorius and his ideas about Christ. He wrote many letters and sermons,
mainly to attack paganism and heresy, and to share his thoughts on monastic
life. His writings are some of the earliest known in the Coptic language and
are considered outstanding in their use of the language. Many of Shenute’s
original works were kept in the monastery library, but they were not
translated into Greek or Latin. Because of this, Western church historians did
not know much about his writings until recently. According to legend, Shenute
led the monastery for 83 years and lived to be 118 years old.

Another famous monastery is the White Cloud Monastery (Boyunguan) at Beijing,
which served as the headquarters for the Quanzhen sect.



## Britannica: Shenute | Monasticism, Coptic, Abbot | Britannica
Shenute (born c. 360—died c. 450) was a monastic reformer, abbot of the White Monastery, near Atripe in Upper Egypt, who is regarded as a saint in the Coptic (Egyptian Christian) Church.
Shenute entered monastic life as a youth and succeeded his uncle as abbot of the White Monastery in 383. He revived the rule of Pachomius, the 4th-century founder of cenobitic, or communal, monasticism (as opposed to the solitary, contemplative religious life), which emphasized manual labour, liturgical prayer, and strict obedience. Shenute was the first abbot to require of his monks a written profession of obedience.
In 431 Shenute attended the Council of Ephesus, where he joined in the condemnation of Nestorius and his teachings on the nature of Christ. Shenute wrote extensively, primarily letters and sermons, attacking paganism and heresy and expressing his views on monastic life. These works are among the earliest-known writings in the Coptic language and, from a literary viewpoint, are considered unsurpassed in their mastery of that language. Although many of Shenute’s original works were preserved in the monastic library, none were translated into Greek or Latin. Thus, his writings were virtually unknown to Western church historians until modern times. According to legend, Shenute ruled the monastery for 83 years and lived to the age of 118.

## Britannica: Taoism - Chinese Philosophy, Yin-Yang, Five Elements | Britannica
China’s reunification under the Tang marked the beginning of Taoism’s most spectacular success. The dynasty’s founder, Li Yuan (known by his temple name, Gaozu), claimed to be descended from Laozi; as his power increased, even the influential Maoshan Taoists came to accept him as the long-deferred fulfillment of messianic prophecy. This notion was built into the dynasty’s state ideology, and the emperor was commonly referred to as the sage (sheng). Prospective candidates for the civil service were examined in either the Lingbao “Classic of Salvation” (Durenjing) or the Maoshan “Classic of the Yellow Court” (Huangtingjing). Under a series of celebrated patriarchs, the Maoshan organization dominated the religious life of the age. One of the greatest of the line, Sima Chengzhen, initiated innumerable government officials and eminent men of letters and served as spiritual master to emperors. The personnel of the Maoshan revelations even entered into the formal framework of state religion. When Sima Chengzhen pointed out that the sacred peaks of the imperial cult were in reality under the superintendence of the perfected of Shangqing, officially sponsored shrines were erected to them there; and their propitiation was incorporated into the traditional rites.
The wide diffusion of Taoism throughout the vast Tang empire is reflected by the sizable proportion of Taoist texts discovered in the walled-up caves at Dunhuang (in Gansu province). This town in the far west of China was the gateway to Central Asia; and here Taoists came into contact not only with Buddhists of many different doctrinal persuasions but also with Nestorian Christians and Manichaeans. Copies of the Laozi were sent to the king of Tibet, and the book was translated into Sanskrit at the request of the ruler of Kashmir. It also reached Japan in the 7th century, as did texts of religious Taoism; reports of Taoism’s dominance on the continent may still be read in the diaries of Japanese Buddhist pilgrims. The geographic extension of the religion at this time was also represented, in the legendary sphere, by the systematic elaboration of its sacred mountains and the traditions attaching to each of them. They are described by the great hagiographer, Du Guangting, at the end of the Tang dynasty. In addition to the great “cavern-heavens” (dongtian), 10 holy mountains known to the original Maoshan revelations, he lists 36 lesser cavern heavens and 72 sanctuaries (fudi). Situated throughout the length and breadth of the empire, they are fitting spiritual guideposts across the dominions of the Tang, which saw itself as an essentially Taocratic realm.
The Song (960–1279) and Yuan (1206–1368) periods witnessed a great religious effervescence, stimulated in part, under the Song, by the menace of foreign invasion and, during the Yuan, by Tantric (esoteric) Buddhism that was in vogue among the new Mongol rulers of China. During the preceding centuries the Way of the Celestial Masters, centered at Longhushan (Dragon-Tiger Mountain, Jiangxi), had been eclipsed by the prestige of Maoshan. At the end of the Northern Song period, the 30th celestial master, Zhang Jixian, was four times summoned to court by the Song emperor Huizong, who hoped for spiritual support for his threatened reign. Zhang Jixian was credited with a renovation of the ancient sect, thereafter called the Way of Orthodox Unity (Zhengyidao), and with the introduction of the influential rites of the “five thunders” (wulei) into Taoist liturgy.
After the retreat of the Song government south of the Yangtze River (1126), a number of new Taoist sects were founded in the occupied North and soon attained impressive dimensions. Among them were the Taiyi (“Supreme Unity”) sect, founded c. 1140 by Xiao Baozhen; the Zhendadao (“Perfect and Great Tao”) sect of Liu Deren (1142); and the Quanzhen (“Perfect Realization”) sect, founded in 1163 by Wang Chongyang (Wang Zhe). This last sect came to the favorable attention of the Mongols, who had taken over in the North, and its second patriarch, Qiu Changqun, was invited into Central Asia to preach to Genghis Khan. The sect enjoyed great popularity, and its establishments of celibate monks continued to be active into the 20th century, with the famous White Cloud Monastery (Boyunguan) at Beijing as headquarters. In the South, Maoshan continued to prosper, while the Gezao sect flourished at the mountain of that name, in Jiangxi province. This was said to be the spot where the 3rd-century Immortal Ge Xuan had ascended to heaven; the sect looked to him as its founder, and it transmitted the Lingbao scriptures, which he was believed to have been the first to receive.
As early as c. 570, the need for a comprehensive collection of information on all the schools had resulted in the first great Taoist encyclopedia. Like other such works in China, it was made up of extracts from sundry books, classified by subject matter. The compilation of similar reference works flourished during the Song and Yuan periods. The most important is the Seven Slips from the Bookbag of the Clouds (Yunjiqiqian; c. 1022), made just after the first printing of the Taoist Canon in about 1016. It is a canon in miniature and contains many important works in their entirety. Hagiography continued to thrive. In addition to many local and sectarian compilations, there were huge general collections, containing the lives of both legendary and historical figures, such as the immense Comprehensive Mirror of the Immortals (Zhenxiantongjian; early 12th century). Sectarian historiography also developed; of particular interest are the extensive monographs devoted to the great mountain centers of Taoism. The Treatise on Maoshan (Maoshanzhi; 1329) is among the most monumental. It includes lives of the saints and patriarchs, notes on topography and history, and a valuable selection from 1,000 years of literary testimony and inscriptions on the mountain and its Taoism. The new Taoist movements, which took northern China by storm in the 12th and 13th centuries, also furnish their own very copious literature: biographies of their masters and collections of their sayings. Among them is the famous account of the travels (1220–24) of a patriarch of the Quanzhen sect into Central Asia in response to the summons of Genghis Khan. Short moral tracts for missionary purposes were yet another popular genre, and, finally, there are innumerable inscriptions from all periods that provide important data on Taoist establishments and their patrons over the centuries.
While learned specialists continued to refine alchemical theory, the period witnessed increasing interest in internal alchemy (neidan), in which the language of the laboratory was used to describe operations realized within the body. This, in a sense, was nothing new. Alchemical metaphors had very early been applied to physiology; Ge Hong, for example, called semen the “yin elixir.” By Song times, however, the systematic interiorization and sublimation of alchemy had become so widespread that all earlier texts of operative, external alchemy (waidan) were henceforth supposed to have really been written about neidan, and the attempt to compound a tangible chemical elixir was thought to have been no more than a hoax. Liturgy also provided its own sublimation of the older art: the liandu (“salvation by smelting”) funeral service was developed at this time, in which an “elixir of immortality” was compounded of written talismans and offered to the deceased.
With such prestigious examples as Chan Buddhism (emphasizing intuitive meditation) and Neo-Confucianism (emphasizing knowledge and reason) before them, Taoists did not long delay in constructing interesting syntheses of their own and other beliefs. Confucianism now joined Buddhism as a fertile source of inspiration. The revelations of Xu Sun, supposed to have lived in the 4th century ce, to one He Zhengong in 1131 inspired the “Pure and Luminous Way of Loyalty and Filial Obedience” (Jingmingzhongxiaodao). This sect preached the Confucian cardinal virtues as being essential for salvation, and consequently won a considerable following in conservative intellectual and official circles. Another highly popular syncretistic movement of Taoist origin was that of the Three Religions (sanjiao). Its composite moral teachings are represented by popular tracts, the so-called “books on goodness” (shanshu), which have been in extremely wide circulation since the Ming dynasty (1368–1644).
